Here I Stand, 2nd Printing
20
© 2010 GMT Games, LLC
4.
attacker
declares Combat Cards: The attacker declares any
Combat cards he wants to play as events to affect the battle. 5.
d
efender
d
eclares Combat Cards:
The defender declares any
Combat cards he wants to play as events to affect the battle. If more than one major power is controlling defending units in this
space, each of these powers may play Combat cards.6.
roll
dice: Both sides roll their dice (taking into account that
play of the Combat cards
Mercenaries Bribed or
Surprise Attack
in Step 4 or 5 may force a player to roll a different number of dice than the number arrived at in Step 2 or 3). Each roll of a “5” or a “6” is considered to be a hit.
7.
p
lay Janissaries:
If the Ottomans were one of the powers
involved in this battle and they have not yet played
Janissaries
this turn, they may play this Home card to roll extra dice in an
attempt to score additional hits.8.
declare
w
inner: The side scoring the most hits is declared the
winner of the battle. In the case of a tie, the defender is declared the winner.9. Take Casualties: Each side eliminates 1 land unit for each hit scored by the opposing side. If both sides are eliminated, the side
that rolled more dice retains 1 unit. If both sides are eliminated
and the two sides rolled the same number of dice, the defender
retains 1 unit.10. Capture Leaders:
If one or more leaders are present on a side
that is completely eliminated, they are captured by the enemy. Place a captured leader on the power card of the adversary which
defeated him. He may be regained in the Diplomacy Phase of an
upcoming turn (see Section 9).11. Conduct
retreats: The units of the losing power retreat as
described in 14.1 (unless they were all eliminated).
12. Check for
siege:
If the battle occurred in a fortified space and
the active player won, check to see if the active formation has more units than the losing player has inside the fortifications. If so, this
space is now under siege (Section 15). If not, the active player must
retreat his force as specified in Section 15.3, Breaking a Siege.
14.1 retreat
All remaining units and army leaders from the losing power must
retreat. If the battle occurred in a fortified space, and the power
controlling that space lost the battle, then any number of land
units up to four (at the owner’s discretion), and any number of
army leaders, may withdraw into the fortifications. The stack of
units remaining outside the fortifications after such a withdrawal (or all losing power units if the battle did not occur in a fortified space) must then retreat to a single adjacent space chosen by the
owner of those units. That space must meet all the restrictions
listed below. If no legal space exists,
all units in that stack are
eliminated; any army leaders present are captured.
restrictions:
•
Units may not retreat into a space in unrest or a space containing
enemy units.
•
Units may not retreat into a sea zone.
•
Units may not retreat into an independent space or a space
controlled by another power unless that power is an ally of the
retreating power.
•
If the defender lost the battle, his units may not retreat into the
space from which the enemy entered.
•
If the active power lost the battle, the space chosen must be the
space from which this formation entered the battle.
INTERCEPTION AND BATTLE EXAMPLE: It is the Ottoman impulse. Suleiman, Ibrahim, 7 regulars and 1 cavalry are stacked in Pressburg, the space between Vienna and Buda. The Ottoman
spends 1 CP to move the entire formation to Vienna. Charles V and 8 Hapsburg regulars are stacked in Graz, adjacent to Vienna. They attempt to intercept, adding 2 to their dice roll due to Charles’ Battle Rating and subtracting 1 for the presence of Ottoman cavalry. Charles’ formation rolls an 8, just enough to complete the interception. [If they had failed the interception attempt, Ferdinand and the 2 regulars in Vienna would have had the option to either fight a land battle outside Vienna (not a smart option!), avoid battle to Brunn, Linz or Graz, or withdraw into the fortifications of Vienna.] In the resulting field battle, the Ottomans roll 8 dice for their units plus 2 dice for Suleiman (their best leader), for a total of 10 dice. The Hapsburgs will roll 10 dice for their units plus 2 dice for Charles plus 1 die as defender, for a total of 13 dice. The Ottomans score 3 hits on their 10 dice; the Hapsburgs score 5 on their 13 dice. 3 Hapsburg
regulars are eliminated; the Ottoman chooses to eliminate the cavalry unit and 4 regulars. Suleiman, Ibrahim, and the remain
-
ing 3 regulars retreat to the space from which they entered the
field battle (Pressburg). Charles, Ferdinand and 7 Hapsburg regulars remain in Vienna.
