attributes
All rulers possess two attributes: administrative rating and card bonus, as described below. English and Papal rulers also affect
the resolution of religious conflicts (Section 18). Explanatory text
is included on the power card or Mandatory Event card for each
English/Papal ruler to show how that ruler alters the resolution
of religious conflicts.a
dministrative
r
ating:
The administrative (or “admin”) rating of
a ruler evaluates that ruler’s ability to conserve national resources so they can be applied in times of need. An administrative rating
is always given in terms of the number of cards that ruler can save
from one turn to the next.Card
bonus:
The card bonus of a ruler evaluates whether or not
a ruler was exceptionally resourceful in mobilizing support for his endeavors. A card bonus is given in terms of the number of extra
cards a power is dealt when led by this ruler.
additional ruler functions
The Protestant rulers Luther and Calvin may also affect the game
as reformers and as debaters (Section 18). Some rulers may affect
the game as army leaders: Suleiman I (Ottoman); Charles V (Haps
burgs); Francis I, Henry II (France); and Henry VIII (England).
See Section 5.1. These additional functions are entirely separate
from their role as ruler of a major power. While serving in these
additional capacities, these rulers function like any other reformer,
debater, or army leader and are governed by the appropriate section
of the rules for that type of unit.
4. power Cards
The status of each major power is tracked on a power card. Each
of the 6 power cards contains the following sections:
List of
ctions
(upper-left):
A list of each possible action
that this power can under
take during the Action Phase
(Section 11), including the
actions’ CP cost. The list
of possible actions differs
by power.
Initial
r
uler Card
(upper-right): Attributes of the initial ruler
for this power, as described in Section 3.3.
b
onus V

b
ox
(lower-right): This is a holding area for mark
ers that show the player has gained bonus Victory Points (VP)
for Voyages of Exploration, Voyages of Conquest, disgracing
or burning enemy debaters, winning wars, controlling keys in
Italy, completing Bible translations, and other special events.
The power card also contains customized information in the lower-left. Although the format of this section differs for each power, this section always shows how to determine the number of card draws
for that power (before card bonuses are added) and the number
of base VP (before special and bonus VP are added). For some
powers this area also includes one or more special power-specific
tracks, described in more detail in Sections 18 and 21.
5. MILIT
ary unITs
There are three types of military units: leaders, land units, and
naval units. This section shows an example of each military unit
and explains the importance of any numeric values on the coun-
ter. The pieces provided are an absolute limit. No more may be
created for any purpose; the number provided is indicative of the
overall manpower and financial resources of each power during
this period. Military units use the same color as the home spaces
for each power.
5.1 Leaders
Leaders are placed in plastic stands so players can
quickly determine their current location on the map.
(Flat leader counters are also provided for those who
prefer this alternative.) The numeric information
contained on the leader counter differs slightly for
army and naval leaders. Naval leaders have a blue background for their coun-ters that distinguishes them from army
leaders.
army Leader
battle
rating:
The top number on army leaders is their battle
rating. Higher battle ratings increase the chance of successfully
intercepting or avoiding battle, and add extra dice during assault
and field battle.Command
rating:
The bottom number (always appearing in a
yellow box) is the leader’s command rating. This number indicates the number of land units the leader can control at one time.
formations
A formation is a group of land units in a single space that func-
tions as a combined entity for the purposes of movement, field
battle, intercept, and assault. One or more army leaders may also
be included in the formation. The maximum number of land
units in a formation is dependent on the Command Rating of any
leaders present: Leaders Present
Maximum Formation Size

none

Command Rating of leader

2 or more
Sum of highest two command ratings
Army leaders are never counted when determining the size of a formation. Formations may not include units from two different major powers. They may include units of a major power and a
minor power which is actively allied to that major power.
FORMATION EXAMPLE: The Ottoman leaders Suleiman (com-mand rating 12) and Ibrahim Pasha (command rating 6) are stacked
in Buda with 12 regulars and 2 cavalry. The Ottoman spends 1 CP to move a formation to Pressburg. If the Ottoman includes neither leader with the formation, just 4 land units may move. If the Ottoman
includes only 1 leader, the number of regulars and cavalry must be
equal to or less than the command rating of that leader. The Ottoman
player would have to move both leaders from the space in order to move all 14 land units from Buda.
