Wars of the Reformation 1517–1555
13
© 2010 GMT Games, LLC
2.
a
ward Vps:
The other power in this conflict is de-
clared the winner. Add a “War Winner 1VP” marker to the bonus VP box on their power card. If the Ottoman
was one of the powers involved in the war, the winner
receives an extra “War Winner 1 VP” marker in this step (for a
total of two such markers).3. Give
up Control:
The losing power gives up control of all of
the winning power’s home spaces that the loser currently controls.
Any land units and army leaders occupying these spaces are placed in the nearest fortified space controlled by their power or in their capital (if under friendly control). Naval units and leaders are placed in the nearest port controlled by their power. Count sea zones as a space
when determining the shortest path. If two spaces are equidistant, the space is chosen by the owning player.

4.
remove
units: The losing power removes 2 units (land or
naval) of his choice from the map.
Units removed must be from
his own power (allied units are not eligible).
5.
regain Home Keys: The losing power then decides if it wants
to regain political control of any home keys currently controlled by the winning power. If so, the losing power must give the winner
one of the following items for each key recovered: •
another “War Winner 1VP” marker, or
•
a random card draw from the loser’s current hand.
Any units occupying these spaces are displaced to the nearest fortified space controlled by their power, or its capital, using the
process described in Step 3 above.6.
regain Captured Leaders: The losing power then decides if
it wants to regain an army leader captured by the winning power. If so, the losing power gives the winning power a VP marker or
random card draw for each army leader regained. Place the army
leader in his capital if possible; if not, place him in a friendly home
key (losing player’s choice).7.
r
egain
n
on-Key
s
paces:
The losing power then decides if
it wants to regain political control of any number of sets of
two
non-key home spaces currently controlled by the winning power. If so, the losing power gives the winning power a VP marker or
random card draw for each set of two spaces recovered.8.
adjust
diplomatic
status
display: End the war by removing
the “At War” marker from the appropriate box on the Diplomatic Status Display. If the Papacy makes peace with a power whose ruler is currently under Excommunication (Section 21.5), the Excommunication is lifted. Remove the “–1 card” marker from
the appropriate power card.NOTES:(1) Playing the card
Diplomatic Marriage allows a player suing
for peace to regain ALL lost items in Steps 5 to 7 without yielding
any additional VP or card draws.(2) All “War Winner” markers awarded during this procedure come from the counter mix; once earned a power never has to give up
any of its own “War Winner” markers.
9.4 ransom of Leaders
The third segment of the Diplomacy Phase allows a power to regain a captured army leader whose return was not negotiated
in the Negotiation segment. The power that captured the army
leader draws one card (the ransom) from the hand of the power
requesting the leader back. Place that army leader in his capital if
possible; if not, place him in a friendly home key. Any number of
army leaders may be ransomed in this segment. However, there
is never any requirement to ransom an army leader; a power may
choose to let him remain a captive indefinitely.
9.5 removing excommunication
The fourth segment of the Diplomacy Phase allows a power to
remove a “–1 Card” marker that was placed on it by an Excom-
munication (Section 21.5) of their ruler during a previous turn.
The Papal player draws one card (the donation to the church) from
the hand of the power that was excommunicated. The CP value
of that card is added to the Papal fund for St. Peter’s construc-tion. The card is then placed in the discard pile. Any number of excommunications may be lifted in this segment. However, there
is never any requirement to remove an excommunication; a power
may choose to retain the “–1 Card” marker indefinitely.
9.6 declarations of
w
ar
The fifth segment of the Diplomacy Phase allows a power to declare
war on one or more powers, major or minor. Follow the DOW
procedure below, totaling the CP costs of all declarations/interven
-
tions made by each power. When all powers have completed the
procedure, each declaring or intervening power then plays one or
more cards from his hand with a CP value that is equal to or greater than their total CP expenditure. Those cards are placed in the discard pile as if they had been played for CP in the Action Phase (Section
11.0). Mandatory Event cards may not be used to declare war or
intervene on behalf of a minor power.
declaration of
w
ar (dow) procedure
1.
declare
w
ar: Each power, in Impulse Order (Section 3.2),
announces whether or not it would like to declare war on one or
more powers.2.
dow
on Major
powers: If a player declares war on a major
power, the CP cost of the declaration is found by cross-referencing these two powers on the Diplomatic Status Display and looking at
the number found in the appropriate box. [This cost is discounted by 2 CP for the first DOW by the Hapsburgs against the English after Henry VIII marries Anne Boleyn (Section 21.3).] Add an
“At War” marker to this box in the Diplomatic Status Display.
These powers are now at war until a peace is agreed to in a future
Diplomacy Phase,
either through negotiations (9.1) or by suing
for peace (9.3)
.
3.
dow
on Minor
powers: If a player declares war
on a minor power, the CP cost of the declaration is
always 1 CP. Add an “At War” marker to this row for
the declaring power in the relevant minor power’s column of the
Diplomatic Status Display.
Since you may not make peace with a
minor power, these powers will probably be at war for the rest of the game. The only exceptions are wars between France/Scotland and the Papacy/Venice. These wars may be ended if another major
power declares war on one of these minor powers and the natural ally decides to intervene (see Steps 4 and 5 below).
4.
dow
on
scotland: If a declaration of war is made against
Scotland, the French player may immediately spend 2 CPs to inter
-
