One or more army leaders may move without accompanying land units as long as they don’t enter a space controlled by an
enemy power or containing enemy units. If an army leader
is ever alone in an unfortified space when enemy land units
enter due to enemy movement, retreat, or interception, that
leader is captured. Place the captured leader on the enemy power card. He may be regained in the Diplomacy Phase of an upcoming turn (see Section 9).
The two Move actions follow the same procedure:
Land Movement procedure
declare
formation: The active power declares which forma-
tion of land units and army leaders will be moved.2.
eclare
estination
s
pace:
The active power declares the
destination space for the move. The destination must be adjacent to the formation’s current space.3.
e
xpend C
s:
Two CPs are expended if the move is over a pass;
otherwise the cost is just one CP.
4.
play
response Cards: Other powers may play the Response
cards Foul Weather and Gout to disrupt this Move action.
5. Conduct any Interceptions:
Interceptions (Section 13.2)
may occur if an enemy stack is adjacent to the destination space. Interceptions may add enemy units to the space being entered.
Once all interceptions have been resolved, the land units and army
leaders being moved are placed in the destination space. If any
interceptions succeeded, skip to Step 8 and resolve a field battle.6. Conduct
void
b
attle:
If the destination space contains enemy
land units, all or some of them may try to avoid battle (Section 13.3).7.
ithdraw into
f
ortification:
If after unsuccessful interception
and avoid battle attempts (if any)
the enemy stack in a fortified
destination space has 4 or fewer units present, those enemy units have the option of withdrawing into fortifications (Section 13.4).
8.
fight
field
battle:
If enemy land units are still present in the
space, and those land units are not inside fortifications, then a field battle occurs in this space (Section 14).
13.2 Interception
An enemy power with land units adjacent to a Move action’s
destination space may attempt to intercept the moving formation.
If multiple enemy stacks are adjacent to the destination space,
each may attempt to intercept. Each such attempt is announced
and resolved before announcing and resolving any other attempts.
If multiple stacks from different enemy powers all want to inter
cept, resolve the interception attempts in Impulse Order. Once
one power succeeds, no other power may attempt an interception
(even if that other power is an ally of the intercepting power). Formations belonging to the successful intercepting power may however continue to attempt to intercept from any number of
adjacent spaces.
restrictions:
Formations moving due to avoid battle, interception, and
retreats may not be intercepted.
Formations may never intercept across a pass.
Only units of a power that is At War with the active power
may intercept.
Units and army leaders that have already tried to intercept a
movement in this same impulse (whether or not they were
successful) may not try to intercept again.
Units and army leaders currently under siege may not try to
intercept. If a besieging force moves out of a space under
siege, the stack formerly under siege may not intercept the move out of that fortified space.
All land units and army leaders allocated in Step 1 of the In-terception Procedure (see below) must start the Move action
in the same space and it must be permissible to move them
in a single formation.
Formations moving into a friendly fortified space that is not
under siege may not be intercepted.
Formations moving into a space that already contains land
units may only be intercepted if the intercepting units belong
to the same power as the units in the destination space, or
to a power allied to the units in the destination space.
Such
an interception is not allowed if there are units under siege
(from any power) at the start of the active formation’s move.
Units may not intercept into a space controlled by another
power unless the power controlling the space is either an
enemy or an ally of the intercepting units.
Interception procedure
eclare
f
ormation:
An intercepting power with land units and/
or army leaders in a space adjacent to the movement destination
declares which formation will attempt an interception. This forma
tion does not need to include all of the units present.2.
roll
dice: The intercepting power rolls two dice and adds the
best single Battle Rating of an army leader (if any) in the inter
cepting formation to the dice sum. The Ottoman power adds 1 to its result if at least 1 cavalry unit is in the intercepting formation.
A non-Ottoman power subtracts 1 from the result if it is trying to
intercept a stack containing Ottoman cavalry. If the modified dice roll is 9 or more, the Interception Attempt is successful.3.
lace in
estination
s
pace:
If successful, the intercepting
formation is placed in the destination space. This formation is treated as if it were present in the space before the moving for
mation arrived. Once one power succeeds, no other power may
attempt an intercept (even if that other power is an ally of the
intercepting power). 4.
repeat for other
f
ormations:
Return to Steps 1-3 and resolve
interception attempts from any other adjacent space. Additional attempts from a space already chosen in Step 1 are not permitted.5.
fight
field
battle: If any of the interceptions were successful,
fight a field battle (Section 14) in the destination space. All units from the intercepting power must participate in this battle; they
may not avoid battle or withdraw into a fortification.
13.3
void battle
When a power enters a space containing a stack of enemy land
units, some or all of those enemy units may try to move to an
adjacent space to avoid battle. If the destination space contains
land units from more than one major power (who are allies), each
major power may, in impulse order, announce and resolve an avoid
battle attempt. Each such attempt is announced and resolved be-fore announcing and resolving any other attempts. Minor power
