Here I Stand, 2nd Printing
22
© 2010 GMT Games, LLC
15.2 relief forces
A formation friendly to the units in the fortification may enter a fortified space under siege and initiate a field battle in an attempt
to break the siege. In this “relief force” situation, units and army
leaders inside the fortification that are controlled by the same
major power as the relief force may participate in the field battle.
These forces inside the fortification may participate
even if the
total number of units now exceeds the allowable formation size
(based on the leaders present in that space). The player may choose
to withhold units that started the impulse within the fortification
from the field battle if he does not want to risk losing them. There
are three possible results in this relief force situation:
•
If the active player wins the resulting battle, the besieging
forces retreat and the siege is broken.
•
If the active player loses the battle but the number of hits
scored by both sides is
equal, the active player may choose
to retreat any units or army leaders that participated in the
battle into the fortifications (including units that were part of
the relief force that entered the space). The total number of
units inside the fortification may never exceed 4 after such a
retreat. All other attacking units retreat as per Section 14.1.
•
If the active player loses the battle and the number of hits he
scored was
less than his opponent, only units that started the
impulse inside the fortification may retreat back inside. All
other attacking units retreat as per Section 14.1. If all attacking
units in the relief force were eliminated, any attacking army
leaders in the relief force are captured and there is no retreat.
15.3 breaking a siege
A siege is broken immediately if the besieging stack no longer
contains more land units than are in the fortification (cavalry units
are included in these counts). This may occur if part of the besieg
-
ing force leaves the space as part of a Move action, a successful
interception, or a successful avoid battle attempt. It may also occur
if the besieging stack takes severe losses during an assault or battle against a relief force, or due to an Event card play. When the siege is broken, the stack must retreat to any adjacent space that meets
the following restrictions. This retreat does not cost any CP. If no
such legal space exists,
all units in that stack are eliminated;
any army leaders present are captured.restrictions:
•
Units may not retreat into a space in unrest or a space con-taining enemy units.
•
Units may not retreat into a sea zone.
•
Units may not retreat into an independent space or a space
controlled by another power unless that power is an ally of
the retreating power.
16. na
V
aL

affaIrs
Naval units move, fight, intercept, and avoid battle in the sea zones
and ports of the map, much as land units do in the spaces of the map. Naval units also provide a transport capability that allows land units to traverse sea zones (as long as that movement takes
place in a single impulse). Ottoman corsairs can also initiate piracy.
16.1 naval Movement
A power may move naval units with the Naval Move action (1
CP). Unlike land movement (where a Move action allows just one
formation to move), the Naval Move action allows ALL naval
units of that power (and their activated Minor Power allies and
any lent fleets) to perform a move, wherever they are on the map.
Naval movement may trigger interception attempts by enemy naval units. Enemy naval units are also allowed to try to avoid battle in response to Naval Move actions.
Siege, Relief Force, Assault Example
French Impulse:
Francis and 6 regulars occupy Brussels,
which is now under French political control. Francis uses a
Move Formation in Clear action to move all his units to Calais
in an attempt to besiege that key. Brandon’s formation of 4
regulars in adjacent Boulogne fails to intercept this move. The
2 English regulars in Calais withdraw into the fortications, hoping for relief from Brandon during the upcoming English impulse. Since Francis’ formation outnumbers the English
defenders in Calais, that key is now under siege. An assault
must wait until the next French impulse.English Impulse: Brandon now comes to the aid of Calais. The French do not avoid battle. A relief force field battle en-
sues. The English choose to have the units inside the garrison
participate in the battle, giving them 6 dice for units and 1
for the leader Brandon. The French roll 6 dice for units, 1 for
the leader Francis, and 1 as defender. The English fail to get
any hits on 7 dice; the French score 2 hits. The English take
the losses on Brandon’s formation; he retreats with 2 regulars
back to Boulogne.French Impulse:
Francis is now ready to assault Calais. The
2 French fleets in the North Sea (compared to the 1 English fleet in Calais ) provide just enough of a naval presence to
satisfy the requirements for an assault. The French roll 1 die
for every 2 land units (rounding up fractions), giving 3 dice, plus 1 for Francis. The English roll 2 dice for units plus 1 die as defender. If the French can score 2 hits, Calais will fall and
the English fleet will be eliminated.
