2.5 other Map elements
Four other elements of the map are important to play.
Language Zone
The background of the game map is color-coded to depict five language zones. Each space falls entirely within a single language
zone, as determined by looking at the background color of the
map around that space.
Exception: the spaces within a tan back-
ground; these spaces lie outside all five language zones. Spaces
within a language zone are sometimes referred to as “speaking” that language, e.g. a space in the English language zone is an “English-speaking space.” Language
Language Zone Color
English
pale red
French
pale blue
German
gray
Italian
pale purple
Spanish
pale yellow
pass
A connection shown with a dashed line is a pass. There are 3 passes across the Pyrenees between Spain and France, 6 passes in
the Alps near northern Italy, and 7 passes in the Balkans. Forma-
tions of land units moving over a pass expend 2 command points
(CPs) instead of the usual cost of 1 CP for moving over a normal
connection. Passes also:
slow the spread of religious ideas
block spring deployment of land units
prevent interception by an enemy formation that is adjacent
across a pass, and
inhibit land units’ ability to control adjacent spaces and re-
move unrest in adjacent spaces.
Units may retreat or avoid battle over a pass.
sea Zone
The map contains 14 sea zones, each labeled in a blue italic font.
Boundaries between sea zones are shown by a broken blue line. Only naval leaders and naval units may occupy sea zones; land units must always end every action in a space.
port
Most (but not all) of the spaces near the coast act as ports, which
provide access to one or more sea zones. One-zone ports possess
a single anchor symbol. Two-zone ports have two anchors next
to them, one anchor within each of the two sea zones that may be
accessed from that space. The following sea zones are not connected:
Ionian Sea/Tyrrhenian Sea (two-zone port: Messina)
Barbary Coast/Atlantic Ocean (two-zone port: Gibraltar)
Black Sea/Aegean Sea (two-zone port: Istanbul)
However, if the two-zone port between these zones (Messina, Gibraltar, or Istanbul) is under friendly control, naval units may
move into this port from one zone during one Naval Move action
and then back out to either zone during a later Naval Move action.The following sea zones are CONNECTED (as shown by the double-ended arrows at the top of the map):

North Sea/Irish Sea

North Sea/Baltic Sea
3.0 powers and ruLers
Here I Stand
is best played with either three or six players. The
rules in this booklet are for a game with six players. The small number of rule changes needed to support play with 3 to 5 play-
ers are listed in the section “Games with 3 to 5 Players” in the Scenario Book. Play with 2 players is also possible using the Two-Player Variant presented at the end of the Scenario Book. Unless
you are using the Two-Player Variant, all six major powers are
assigned to a player and take an active part in the conflict. This
section defines players, powers, and rulers and gives high-level
information about each of these game concepts.
3.1 player
In the six-player game, each player controls a single major power. In games with
three to five
players, some players control two major
powers so that all major powers are in play.
3.2 power
A power is a nation or city-state present in the game. The Protestant
reformers and the German princes who defended their religious
changes represent an additional power. There are 10 powers: 6
major and 4 minor. If the text of a rule or card says “power” without
specifying “major” or “minor”, the rule pertains to a major power.
Major power
The major powers are England, France, the Hapsburgs, the Otto-
man Empire, Papacy, and the Protestants. Each major power has
a “power card” (Section 4) that tracks its status with respect to
allowable actions, card draws, victory points, and current ruler.
Many game functions are conducted one power at a time in the
following order:
Ottoman
2.
Hapsburgs
3.
England
4.
France
5.
Papacy
6.
Protestant
Minor power
The minor powers are Genoa, Hungary/Bohemia, Scotland, and
Venice. The allegiance of these states can change during play.
3.3 ruler
The ruler of each major power plays an important role during the
game, whether monarch, sultan, or pontiff. The rulers of two major
powers remain constant throughout the game:
Hapsburgs - always ruled by Charles V
Ottoman Empire - always ruled by Suleiman I
The rulers of the other four major powers change during play as the result of Mandatory Event cards (Section 6.1). The initial ruler for each of these powers is printed on the right side of their power
card. Subsequent rulers enter play through Mandatory Event cards.
These cards are placed over the ruler printed on the power card so
that the new ruler’s attributes are visible to all players.
This order is known as
“Impulse order.”
