From this point forward, conversion of an electorate to Protestant religious influence only allows the Protestant player to immedi-
ately place Protestant regulars from the Electorate display on to
that space if that electorate is also under Protestant political control.
If that electorate is not under Protestant political control, those
regulars are withheld from the map until the instant that space is under both Protestant religious influence and political control. To gain political control, the Protestant player now has to besiege
those electorates which were not automatically converted by the
play of the Schmalkaldic League event.
21.7 foreign
ar Cards
The Event cards
Revolt in Egypt, Revolt in Ireland
and War in
Persia force the Ottoman or English player to divert land units
and/or army leaders off-map to resolve a foreign conflict. When
these events are played, place the Event card on the map near the
affected power’s home spaces. This power then selects the speci-
fied number of land units from any location on the map (except a space under siege) and moves those units onto the card. Units may be chosen from multiple stacks in different spaces. One army
leader may be selected from any location and also moved onto
the card. The Event card also specifies the strength of the foreign
army; use any available independent land units to represent these
foreign units (adding available minor power units if there are not
enough independent ones available). To resolve the conflict, the
Ottoman or English player must spend 1 CP on the Fight Foreign
War action for each resolution attempt. A field battle then ensues
between the major power units and the independent units on the card. The battle is resolved just like a field battle on the map, except that there is no defender to receive one extra die and there is no
retreat. If all independent units are eliminated, the foreign war is
over. All remaining major power units on the card are placed back
in their capital (or any other friendly home key if their capital is
occupied by enemy units). If the independent units were not all
eliminated, the major power will have to pay for another Fight
Foreign War action in a future impulse. Note that foreign war
cards ensure that the major power maintains the specified number
of units on the card by requiring that all new land unit builds be placed on the foreign war card. (The only exception is the 1 regular received during the Winter Phase; this regular is always placed in
the capital even if a foreign war is in progress). The major power
may never place extra units on a foreign war above the required
number. Major power units on a foreign war card can not return
home (even in the Winter Phase) until they have eliminated all of
the independent units in the foreign war.
22. MInor powers
The four minor powers of Genoa, Hungary/Bohemia, Scotland
and Venice can be important partners to many of the powers.
Their role in the game is explained in this section. The section
concludes with a brief description of the independent keys that
are also present within the game.
22.1 Inactive Minor powers
All minor powers have two states: active and inactive. All minor
powers start the game in the inactive state. As described in Section
9.6, a major power may decide to declare war on a minor power.
This declaration of war does not change the minor power from
inactive to active
unless another major power intervenes. In the
inactive state, minor power forces behave as follows:•
They do not move from their current space.
They do not intercept or avoid battle.
If there are 4 or fewer land units in a space, they will always withdraw into the fortifications and try to withstand a siege if their space is entered.
If there are 5 or more land units, they will hold their ground and fight a field battle. If they lose that field battle, do not retreat
their units from the space as usual. Instead, they retain up to 4
units which withdraw into the fortifications; all other land units
in excess of 4 are eliminated.
Inactive naval units remain in their port and defend if that port
is attacked.
Minor power
activation Table
Minor

Can be activated by...
power
england france
Hapsburg papacy deactivate?
Genoa
yes
yes
yes
yes
Hungary-
Bohemia
yes^
Scotland
yes
yes*
yes
Venice
yes
yes
yes +
yes
*France and Scotland are natural allies. France may intervene in Step 4 of the DOW Procedure (Section 9.6) if another power declares war on Scotland.+Papacy and Venice are natural allies. Papacy may intervene in Step 5 of the DOW Procedure (Section 9.6) if another power declares war on Venice.^Hapsburg and Hungary-Bohemia are natural allies. Hapsburg must inter
vene if Hungary-Bohemia is defeated by the Ottomans (22.5).
22.2
activation
Changing a minor power from inactive to active is called “activa-tion”. Each minor power may only be activated by a small group
of major powers (those powers with which the minor power was
closely aligned historically).
(See Minor Power Activation Table,
above).
All active minor powers may subsequently be deactivated,
except for Hungary-Bohemia. Minor Powers can be activated in the following ways:
If France or the Papacy intervenes after a declaration of war (Section 9.6) or if France intervenes after an English DOW on Scotland with the Home card Six Wives of Henry VIII.
The Hapsburg intervenes in Hungary-Bohemia if the Hungar
ians are defeated by the Ottoman as described in Section 22.5.
If France activates Scotland with the card Auld Alliance.
If the Papacy activates Venice with the card
Venetian Alliance.
A major power may play the card
Diplomatic Marriage to
activate any minor power it is permitted to activate according
to the table above.
The French, Hapsburgs, and Papacy may play the card
Andrea
Doria to activate Genoa. Note this is the only card that may
be played to activate a minor power that is already active
(since it deactivates Genoa from that other major power and
then reactivates it with Genoa’s new ally).
