12.4 unrest
Unrest markers are placed on spaces due to the events
Book of
Common Prayer, Cloth Prices Fluctuate, Gabelle Revolt, Janissar
ies Rebel, Peasants’ War, Pilgrimage of Grace,
and
Revolt of the
Communeros.
Unrest markers can also be placed by excommunica
tion of a ruler (Section 21.5) or a failed Reformation attempt using Carlstadt’s debater bonus (Section 18.3). Markers must be placed in spaces that do not contain land or naval units (or leaders) of any power (
Exception:
Book of Common Prayer
and Carlstadt add unrest
to spaces under Catholic influence regardless of occupation status). Unrest has the following effects:
effects:
Units may not use spring deployment, retreat, or avoid battle into or through a space in unrest.
No LOC can be traced through a space in unrest.
No units may be constructed in a space in unrest.
The contents of this space are ignored entirely when con-
ducting Reformation and Counter Reformation attempts in
an adjacent space.
The Protestant may not target an adjacent space for a Ref-
ormation attempt if a space in unrest is the only space under
Protestant religious influence adjacent to that target space.
The Papacy may not target an adjacent space for a Counter
Reformation attempt if a space in unrest is the only space un-
der Catholic religious influence adjacent to that target space.
The space is not considered to be Protestant when computing
victory points (VP).
Electorates in unrest never yield VP to either the Hapsburgs
or Protestants.
A key in unrest is not credited when tracking the number of VP earned and cards to draw. Place an additional Unrest marker on one key box of the affected power’s card for each
key under unrest. Remove these markers when the unrest is
removed from that key.
A fortress in unrest does not roll a die against an Ottoman
piracy attempt in an adjacent sea zone.
Spaces under unrest may be the target of Reformation and Counter
Reformation attempts.
removing unrest
A power may spend 1 CP on the Control Unfortified Space action
to remove unrest from a space if at least one of these conditions is met:
a.
land units controlled by the active power occupy the space,
b.
the unrest is in a Protestant home space, and this is the Protes
tant power removing unrest before the Schmalkaldic League Mandatory Event has occurred, or
c.
land units controlled by the active power are adjacent to the
space and land units of an enemy power are not adjacent.
[For the purposes of this condition, two spaces connected
by a pass should not be considered adjacent.]
Removing unrest does not require an LOC to a space in order to
remove unrest (unlike gaining political control of an unfortified
space where an LOC is required).
13. MoVeMenT
A power may move land units with either the Move Formation
In Clear action (1 CP) or the Move Formation Over Pass action
(2 CPs). All land movement is restricted by the formation rules
(Section 5.1). Land movement may trigger interception attempts by
enemy formations. Enemy stacks are also allowed to try to avoid
battle and withdraw into fortifications in response to Move actions.
13.1 Land Movement procedure
The following restrictions limit the use of a Move action.
restrictions:
All land units and army leaders being moved must start the
action in the same space and it must be permissible to move
them in a single formation.
Formations may always move into a space controlled by
their power or into an independent space. A formation may
only move into a space controlled by another power if either:

◊
the active power is at war with the power controlling the
destination space, or

◊
the active power is allied with the power controlling the destination space.
Formations may not move into a space containing land units from another power unless
the space satisfies one of these
conditions
:

◊
all units in the space are allies of the active power (and this is not a fortified space where one ally has another ally
under siege);

◊
all units in the space are enemies of the active power (and
this is not a fortified space where one enemy has another
enemy under siege)
;

◊
this is a space controlled by an enemy power and all units
in the space are either from that enemy power or allied
to them. When resolving this movement, treat the units
already in the space as “enemy units” for all purposes.
Adjacent units from a power with units in the space are
also considered as enemy units and may intercept into the
space if desired
;

◊
this is a fortified space under siege where either: (a) all
units inside the fortification are allied to the active power
and all besieging units are enemies of the active power,
or (b) all units inside the fortification are enemies of the
active power and all besieging units are allied to the active
power.
Independent regulars in an independent key (Section 22.6)
never prevent the entry of a formation, though that formation
might have to fight off troops from an enemy power before
being able to siege the independent key.
No army leader or unit may participate in a Move action if it was part of a formation that lost a field battle earlier in the
impulse.
No army leader or unit may participate in a Move action if
it occupies an enemy fortified space that
their power placed
under siege (Section 15) earlier in the impulse.
