Wars of the Reformation 1517–1555
35
© 2010 GMT Games, LLC
20.2 Voyages of exploration
The English, French and Hapsburgs may spend 2 CPs on the Explore action. Place the “Exploration Under
-
way” marker for this power in the Crossing Atlantic
Box to show that there is a voyage of exploration to
be resolved at the end of the turn. This action may only be taken
once per turn by each power: play of the Event card
Sebastian
Cabot as an event does NOT count against this limit, play of the
event
Mercator’s Map or explorers that start a scenario in the
Crossing Atlantic box
do count against this limit. A power may
not undertake this action if it has no remaining explorers.
resolution
The eighth phase of each turn is the New World Phase. Voyages
of exploration are always resolved before voyages of conquest.
To resolve these voyages, replace each “Exploration Underway”
marker with a random selection from the pool of explorers cur
-
rently available for this power. Resolve their voyages in order from
best explorer (the one with the highest numeric value) to worst explorer. In the case of a tie, resolve any English voyages, then French, then Hapsburg. For each voyage, roll two dice and add
the explorer’s numeric value (adding 2 more if the card
Merca-
tor’s Map was played to initiate this voyage). The modified die
roll is then located in the Exploration Table to give the result for
the voyage:4 or less:
The explorer is lost at sea; remove him from the game.
5 or 6: No discovery is made; the explorer is returned to the pool for that country. 7, 8, or 9:
A discovery has been made. If the discovery correspond
-
ing to the number rolled has already been claimed earlier in the game, this voyage claims the next available discovery below the
number rolled. The discovery marker is removed from the game
and placed in the Bonus VP box for this power to mark the VP
earned. The explorer used to initiate this voyage is placed over the
appropriate discovery on the map of the New World. The explorer
counter remains there for the rest of the game as a record of his
accomplishments in the New World. 10 or higher: The explorer has penetrated deep into South Amer
-
ica, and has a choice how to proceed. The options are:
1.
The explorer has the option to sail through the Pacific Strait and try to circumnavigate. If the Pacific Strait discovery has not been claimed, place it in the Bonus VP box for this power. Then roll two dice adding the same modifiers as before. Locate
the modified roll in the Circumnavigation Table to give the
result for the circumnavigation attempt. All results of 9 or less
are failure; the explorer is removed from the game. Leave his
counter on the Pacific Strait discovery if he claimed those VP.
A result of 10 or more is success (if the result is 12 or more, a card draw is rewarded as well). Place the Circumnavigation VP marker in the Bonus VP box for this power; place the ex-
plorer counter on the Circumnavigation discovery box on the
map of the New World. No other explorer may circumnavigate
the world during this game once one succeeds.
2.
The explorer has the option to claim the Amazon River dis-
covery (2 VP), placing the VP marker in the power’s Bonus
VP box and leaving the explorer counter on the Amazon
River box.
3.
The explorer has the option to claim any unclaimed discovery
normally worth 1 VP (St. Lawrence River, Great Lakes, or
Mississippi River), just as if he rolled a 7, 8, or 9.
20.3 Voyages of Conquest
The English, French and Hapsburgs may spend 4
CPs on the Conquer action. If the power is England
or France, place an “English Conquest” or “French
Conquest” marker in the Crossing Atlantic box to
mark that there is a voyage of conquest to be resolved at the end
of the turn. If the power is the Hapsburgs, place the Hapsburg “Conquest Underway” marker in the Cross Atlantic Box. This action may only be taken once per turn by each power: play of the
Event card
Smallpox as an event does count against this limit; the
Hapsburg conquistador that starts the game in the Crossing Atlantic
box also counts against this limit. A power may not undertake this
action if it has no remaining conquistadors/conquest markers.
resolution
To resolve these voyages of conquest, first replace a Hapsburg
“Conquest Underway” marker with a random selection from the
pool of conquistadors currently available. Resolve any Hapsburg
voyage first, then English, then French. For each voyage, roll two
dice and add the conquistador’s numeric value. Add 2 if the card
Smallpox was played to initiate this voyage. If the result is a 6 or
less, the expedition is killed by natives; remove the conquistador or
Exploration Example
It is the New World Phase of Turn 1. The Hapsburgs have the explorer that started the scenario in the Crossing Atlantic box
and Sebastian Cabot heading off on voyages of exploration. The English and French have sent explorers too. The explorers are chosen at random and revealed. The following order is established
to resolve these voyages:
3 - Orellana (Hapsburgs)2 - Verranzano (France)
1 - Rut (England)
1 - Cabot (Hapsburgs)Orellana rolls two dice (dice sum is a 6) and adds 3, getting a 9 result; he has discovered the Mississippi River. The Mis-
sissippi River VP marker is placed in the Hapsburg Bonus VP
box and Orellana is placed on the Mississippi River discovery.
Verranzano rolls two dice (dice sum is an 8) and adds 2, getting
a 10 result. He can try to circumnavigate the world. The French players elects to attempt this, but rolls a 5 + 2 = 7. Verranzano is roasted by cannibals! The Pacific Strait VP marker is placed
in the French Bonus VP box and Verranzano is placed on the
Pacific Strait discovery. Rut rolls just a 3, yielding a result of
4. He is lost at sea and removed from the game. Finally the
Hapsburg player rolls a 9 + 1 = 10 for Cabot. Another explorer
can try to circumnavigate! He rolls an 8 + 1 = 9, missing the
circumnavigation by just 1. He is removed from the game and the
Sebastian Cabot
card is removed from the deck. No VP
are earned for Cabot’s efforts since the Pacific Strait VP had already been claimed.
