8.
etermine
r
esult:
If the highest single modified Protestant die
roll exceeds the highest single Papal die roll, the space is flipped to the Protestant side. If this is an electorate being converted to the
Protestant religion for the first time, place a Protestant regular in as
specified in Section 21.6. If the highest Protestant roll is lower, the
attempt fails. Add an unrest marker to the target space if this was an attempt in the German language zone and the Carlstadt debater bonus was used. The Protestant (or English) power wins ties within
the target language zone(s); the Papacy wins ties everywhere else.NOTE: When switching spaces to Protestant religious influence, note that there are no control makers for minor powers. Minor power home spaces that become Protestant are marked by plac-
ing independent (gray) control markers on their white fill side.
18.4 Counter reformation
attempts
The following actions award the Papal player one or more Counter
Reformation attempts (number in parentheses is the number of
attempts):
Burning books (2 normally; 3 in a single language zone if
Cajetan’s debater bonus is used; 3 in any language zone if
Caraffa’s debater bonus is used).
These events cards:
Defender of the Faith (3),
Mary Defies
Council (3), and Erasmus (4).
Each Counter Reformation attempt gives the Papal player a chance
to flip a single space back to Catholic religious influence. Resolve
each attempt according to the following procedure. Each space on
the map can only be the target for a Counter Reformation attempt
once per impulse. If the Papal player fails to convert a space, he
must wait until a future impulse before trying again.
Counter reformation procedure
pick Target
space:
For each Counter Reformation attempt,
the Papal power picks a target space. This space must currently
be Protestant and must either:
Contain a Jesuit university,
Be adjacent to a space under Catholic influence
(even if
across a pass), or
Be a port connected to a sea zone that contains other ports
under Catholic religious influence.
The chosen space may be in any language zone, but the Papacy
will only win ties if Paul III or Julius III is the Papal ruler and the
space is in the target language zone(s). 2.
dd
u
p Catholic
ice:
The Catholic player adds up the number
of dice to roll:
1 die for each adjacent Catholic space
1 die for each adjacent Jesuit university
1 die for each adjacent stack of Catholic land units
2 dice if Jesuit university in target space
2 dice if stack of Catholic units in target space
The Papacy always rolls at least 1 die, even if none of the items above applies to the target space. Adjacent spaces, adjacent uni-versities, or adjacent stacks of units that are either (a) across a
pass or (b) in a space that is in unrest do not provide extra dice.
Reformation Attempt Example
It is the Luther’s 95 Theses Phase at the beginning of Turn 1.
The Protestant player has already taken his first Reformation
attempt and successfully flipped Brandenburg to Protestant
influence. As specified in Section 21.6, this conversion of an
electorate allows the Protestant player to take the 1 regular
listed for Brandenburg on the Electorate display and place it on the map in this space. The situation is shown below: The Protestant player is unsure which space to target with the next Reformation attempt. He therefore decides to compute the odds against all spaces eligible for a Reformation attempt (remember that the Luther’s 95 Theses card grants one extra
die on each attempt):Lubeck: 3 Protestant dice (1 die for adjacent space under Protestant religious influence, 1 die for adjacent stack of Protestant land units, 1 die for 95 Theses) vs. 3 Papal dice
(all for adjacent Catholic spaces). In German language zone,
so Protestant will win a tie.Stettin: 3 Protestant dice (1 adjacent space, 1 adjacent stack, 95 Theses) vs. 1 Papal die (1 adjacent space). In German
language zone, so Protestant will win a tie.Breslau:
6 Protestant dice (2 adjacent spaces, 2 adjacent
stacks, 1 adjacent Reformer, 95 Theses) vs. 1 Papal die (1 adja
cent space). Outside German language zone, Papacy wins a tie.Prague:
4 Protestant dice (1 adjacent space, 1 adjacent stack,
1 adjacent Reformer, 95 Theses) vs. 5 Papal dice (3 adjacent spaces, 1 stack of Catholic land units in space). Outside Ger
man language zone, Papacy wins a tie.Leipzig:
4 Protestant dice (1 adjacent space, 1 adjacent stack,
1 adjacent Reformer, 95 Theses) vs. 4 Papal dice (3 adjacent spaces, 1 adjacent Catholic stack). Protestant wins a tie.Magdeburg: 6 Protestant dice (2 adjacent spaces, 2 adjacent stacks, 1 adjacent Reformer, 95 Theses) vs. 3 Papal dice (3 adjacent spaces). Protestant wins a tie.
Based on the odds, Breslau and Magdeburg look like the best targets. The Protestant chooses Magdeburg since he win a tie
there and doesn’t have to fear that he will lose automatically as soon as the Papacy rolls a 6.
