(since Milan is under French control and Tunis under Hapsburg control at that time). Like other independent spaces, these keys
can be entered by units of any power at any time. Independent
regulars in these keys may not move; they simply defend against
any power that may be attacking them (just like an inactive minor
power, Section 22.1). These regulars may not be rebuilt during play (though they may reenter with the
City State Rebels Event card).
As soon as these keys are captured by a major power, these city states will no longer be independent. Such a key will be controlled
by one major power or another for the rest of the game, unless
they again revert to independent status due to the play of the
City
State Rebels Event card.
23.
Victory
There are five ways to win the game, as explained below. The
first two, Military and Religious victories, occur immediately
in the Action Phase when the appropriate condition is triggered.
Victory is usually achieved in the ninth phase of the turn, the Victory Determination Phase, typically by the accumulation of victory points (VP) by each power. The three types of victory
that may be achieved in this phase are the Standard, Domination,
and Time Limit wins.
23.1
automatic Victories
Military and Religious Victories are immediate wins that end the
game instantly during the Action Phase. The game is over, even
though the turn has not reached the Victory Determination phase.
Military Victory
If a power (other than the Protestant) ever gains control of enough
keys that the Auto Win space is open on their power card
during
the Action Phase, they win a Military Victory immediately. None
of these spaces may contain an Unrest marker.
Note that a Military
Victory is not achieved if a player reveals his Auto Win space dur
ing the Diplomacy Phase (as deals and peace agreements conclude) unless that space is still revealed when the Action Phase starts.
religious Victory
If the Protestant power ever achieves religious influence over 50 spaces, it wins a Religious Victory immediately. None of these
spaces may contain an Unrest marker.
23.2 Victory points
Since Military and Religious Victories are uncommon, the game
is usually decided by accumulation of VP. Each power earns
victory points as shown in the lower-left section of their power
card. A power’s current VP total is the sum of their base, special,
and bonus VP.
base
The English, French, Hapsburg, Ottoman and Papal base VP are
all determined by the number of keys they control. Award the
VP shown in the last open box on their power card. Make sure to
mark a box with an Unrest marker for each key currently in un-
rest. Boxes with Unrest markers are not considered “open” when
computing base VP. If all spaces are covered, that power has 0
base VP. The Protestant player adds up base VP as follows: 2 VP
for each electorate that is under Protestant religious influence and
political control.
protestant spaces
Three powers gain special VP based on the number of spaces under
Protestant religious influence among English home spaces (for
England) or anywhere on the map (for Papacy and Protestants).
Adjust the Protestant Spaces marker on the Protestant Spaces
Track on the Religious Struggle Card whenever an action or event
causes the number of spaces under Protestant influence to go up or down. The marker should always be placed over the box with the large number that corresponds to the current number of Protestant
spaces. The box also contains two smaller numbers: the current
special VP award to both the Papacy (listed first in purple) and the
Protestant (listed second in brown). Similarly, adjust the English
Home Spaces marker whenever an action or event changes the
number of English home spaces under Protestant influence. The
back of the English Home Spaces counter reminds players that
the English earn 1 VP for every 2 English home spaces under
Protestant religious influence (round fractions down).
special
The special VP received by each power are as follows:
ottoman
piracy: 1 VP for each VP space marked on the piracy track of the
Ottoman player card.
Hapsburgs
electorates: 1 VP for each electorate under Hapsburg political
control (that is not in unrest). These points are not awarded until
the Schmalkaldic League Mandatory event has been played.
england
Male heir:
5 VP if Edward VI is born during a roll on the Six
Wives of Henry VIII table. The English receive 2 VP if Edward
has not been born but Elizabeth I has.protestant spaces:
1 VP for every 2 English home spaces that
have been converted to the Protestant faith. Round fractions down.
france
Chateaux:
1 VP for each chateau that has been built using the
Patron of the Arts Home card.
papacy
protestant spaces: Look at the box under the Protestant Spaces marker on the Protestant Spaces Track. Award the number of VP
listed in purple as special VP for the Papacy.s
aint
eter’s:
1 VP for each space marked on the lower St.
Peter’s track.
protestant
protestant spaces:
Look at the box under the Protestant Spaces
marker on the Protestant Spaces Track. Award the number of VP listed in brown as special VP for the Protestant.
