1 die for each corsair
2 dice for each naval squadron
1 die for each Battle Rating point from their highest-rated naval leader in the sea zone or port
2.
defender
adds
up
dice:
The intercepting player or the player
with the stack of units that began the Naval Move action in the
destination location is always considered the defender in a naval
combat. The defender adds up the number of dice he will roll as
follows:
1 die for each corsair
2 dice for each naval squadron
1 die for each Battle Rating point of their highest-rated naval
leader in the sea zone or port
1 die for being the defender, but only if this combat is taking
place in a port
3.
attacker
declares Combat Cards:
The attacker declares any
Combat cards he wants to play as events to affect the combat.4.
efender
eclares Combat Cards:
The defender declares
any Combat cards he wants to play as events to affect the combat.
5.
roll
dice: Both players roll their dice and add up the number
of hits they have scored. Each roll of a “5” or a “6” is considered to be a hit.6.
play
response Cards: If the Ottoman was one of the powers
involved in this battle and they have not yet played Janissaries this turn, they may play this Home card to roll extra dice in an at-
tempt to score additional hits. Any power may play the Response
card
Professional Rowers to give one side an attempt to score
additional hits.7.
declare
inner:
The side scoring the most hits is declared the
winner of the battle. In the case of a tie, the defender is declared the winner.8. Take Casualties: Each side eliminates 1 naval squadron for every 2 hits scored by the opposing side. If hits against the Otto-
man power remain after applying hits to naval squadrons, each
remaining hit eliminates 1 corsair. Odd hits remaining against the
losing side eliminate 1 extra naval squadron; odd hits remaining
against the winner are ignored. If both sides are eliminated, the side that rolled more dice retains 1 unit. If both sides are eliminated and the two sides rolled the same number of dice, the defender
retains 1 unit.9.
one
power
retreats: If the combat occurred in a port, the
attacker retreats to a sea zone connected to that port that is free of enemy naval units.
(NOTE: The attacker retreats regardless
of whether or not he won the battle.)
If the combat occurred in a
sea zone, the loser retreats to an adjacent port under its control (free of enemy naval units) or an adjacent sea zone (also free
of enemy naval units).
If no such location exists, the naval units
are eliminated.10.
place
units on Turn Track: If one or more naval leaders are
present on a side that is completely eliminated, they are placed on the next turn of the Turn Track. All naval units lost in the combat
are also placed on the Turn Track. In a future turn, the leader will
reenter play and the naval units may be rebuilt (8.2).
16.3 naval Transport
If a power has naval units in one or more adjacent sea zones, it
may make a special move of lands units across those sea zones.
This special move is called “naval transport” and is considered to
be a special case of the Move Formation In Clear action.
naval Transport procedure
spend Cps and Move: The active power must have at least 2
CPs remaining to spend in the current Action Phase. If so, a for
mation of 5 or fewer land units (plus army leaders) in a port may
move to an adjacent sea zone containing naval units controlled by
the active power. This move costs 1 CP and is considered to be a
Move Formation in Clear action. Units moving by naval transport may not be intercepted at sea. Other powers may play the Response card
Foul Weather to disrupt naval transport. A formation under
siege may not be moved by naval transport.
Naval Movement and Combat Example
It is the Ottoman impulse. Genoa is a Hapsburg ally. Venice
is a Papal ally, but they loaned 1 Venetian fleet to the Haps-
burgs during the Diplomacy Phase of this turn. The Ottoman
undertakes a Naval Move action. After moving several other
naval squadrons into the Aegean Sea, the Ottoman also moves
Barbarossa and the 3 naval units in Tunis (2 squadrons and 1 corsair) to the Barbary Coast, as shown above. A Hapsburg naval force consisting of Andrea Doria, a Genoese squadron,
and a Hapsburg squadron is in an adjacent sea zone, the Tyr
rhenian Sea. The loaned Venetian fleet is also in an adjacent
sea zone, the Ionian Sea. Both stacks of Hapsburg naval units
attempt to intercept. Each rolls a 7 on two dice. Because of
the +2 added to the roll for Doria’s Battle Rating, his stack
succeeds. The stack without Andrea Doria’s modifier does
not. Naval combat ensues in the Barbary Coast. The Ottoman
rolls 7 dice (4 for the two squadrons, 1 for the corsair, 2 for Barbarossa). The Hapsburgs roll 6 dice (4 for squadrons, 2 for Doria). Each side rolls 3 hits. Since the Hapsburgs are the
defender, they win the battle. An Ottoman squadron and corsair
are eliminated. Barbarossa and the remaining squadron must
retreat to an adjacent sea zone or controlled port (though it
doesn’t have to be Tunis). The Hapsburgs eliminate one of their
squadrons; the other remains with Doria in the Barbary Coast.
