Wars of the Reformation 1517–1555
7
© 2010 GMT Games, LLC
naval Leader
battle
rating:
The top number on naval leaders is
their battle rating. Higher battle ratings increase the chance of successfully intercepting or avoiding battle,
and add extra dice during naval combat.
p
iracy
r
ating:
The Ottoman naval leaders Barbarossa and
Dragut possess a second numeric value. This number (after the
“P”) is their piracy rating, indicating the number of extra dice the
leader provides when present in a sea zone where the Ottoman is
initiating piracy.
5.2 Land units
There are three types of land units, all represented with circular
pieces. Land unit pieces come in different “denominations” (1, 2,
4, and 6) to facilitate stacking. Not all denominations are available
for every power. Players may free up small denomination units
at
any time by replacing several pieces (all of the same type and all
in the same space) with a stronger piece of equal total strength. If, after freeing up small denomination units wherever possible across the board, a power still has an insufficient number of small
denomination units to properly “make change” to satisfy a Combat
or Event card result, that power loses additional units from the
space where the combat or event is occurring until a number is
reached that can be represented with the available counters. The four denominations of Hapsburg regulars regulars: Regulars have a multi-colored unit symbol and a dark stripe across the bottom of the counter in their power’s color.
The numeric value on the counter shows the number of regulars
represented by this game piece. All powers, both major and minor,
have regulars.Mercenaries: Mercenaries have a solid black unit symbol. The
background is a pale version of their power’s color. The numeric value on the counter shows the number
of mercenaries represented by this game piece. All
major powers except the Ottoman receive mercenar
-
ies. Mercenary units can be found on the reverse side
of regulars for these powers. Mercenaries are cheaper to construct
than regulars, but may desert a player at a key moment.Cavalry:
Only the Ottoman player possesses cavalry units. The
numeric value on the counter shows the number of cavalry units represented. Cavalry units can be found on the reverse side of Ottoman regulars. Cavalry aid in intercept and avoid battle attempts,
but are ineffective during siege operations.
5.3 naval units
Rectangular pieces are used to represent naval units. Each naval
unit always represents a single squadron or corsair. There are no
denominations of naval units.
s
quadron:
Naval squadron counters depict
a vessel with white sails. The numeric value
on the counter shows the number of dice
it rolls in naval combat and the number of
enemy hits required to eliminate it. The color around the number
shows which power owns the squadron. All powers have naval
squadrons, except the Protestants and Hungary/Bohemia.
Corsair: Corsair counters depict a vessel
with black sails. The numeric value on the
counter shows the number of dice it rolls in
naval combat and the number of enemy hits
required to eliminate it. Corsairs can be found on the reverse side
of Ottoman naval squadrons. Only the Ottoman power receives Corsairs.
6. Cards
The game play in
Here I Stand is driven by a single deck of 110
cards. This section explains each of the different types of cards, and how to manage adding and removing cards from the deck.
6.1 Card Types
There are five types of cards in the game, as described below.
With the exception of Mandatory Event cards, every card may be
played as either an event, or as command points (CPs). CPs may be
used to take actions (Section 11), or to declare war (Section 9.6).
(When playing a Mandatory Event, the event takes effect first, then
the active power receives 2 CPs to spend on actions.) If a player uses a card as an event, he or she follows the instructions printed on the card. Some cards have two alternate sets of instructions
separated by the word “OR” in capital letters. These cards give
the player an option of playing them two different ways. When
playing a card with two sets of instructions, only the conditions
and effects in the portion of the card chosen by the player apply.
Home Cards
Each power has a specific Home card (the Papacy has two) which
starts every turn in their hand. Once used, Home Cards are placed
on the appropriate power card (not in the discard pile) to show
that they are not available until cards are dealt at the start of the
next turn. A player may not pass during his impulse in the Action
Phase if a Home Card is still in his hand.
Home Cards can never be
drawn from a power’s hand when a random draw is required (either by Event card play, diplomatic agreement, or piracy),
even if it is
the last card in your hand.
Mandatory event Cards
Cards with the name of the card in red and the word “Mandatory” printed on them are Mandatory Event cards. Mandatory Event
must be played during the Action Phase of the turn in which they
are drawn. When played, the event is always resolved first, then
