Activate a minor power using the following procedure: 1.
lace “
llied” Marker:
Add an “Allied” marker to the box that
cross-references these powers on the Diplomatic Status Display.2.
eclarations of
ar:
A power currently at war with this minor
power has the choice to immediately declare war (at no cost in CP) on the major power that is activating the minor power. That
power may only declare war if none of the “restrictions at all times”
listed in Section 9.6 apply. If the power chooses to declare war,
add an “At War” marker to the appropriate box on the Diplomatic
Status Display. If the power declines to declare war, any units of
that power occupying spaces controlled by this minor power are returned to the nearest fortified space (that is not under siege), as described in Step 3 of the Peace Segment Procedure (9.3). 3.
place
square Control Markers:
All keys currently controlled
by the minor power are now marked with square control markers from the major power.4.
lace Hexagonal Control Markers:
All other spaces controlled
by the minor power are marked with hexagonal control markers from the major power.5.
remove “at
ar” Markers:
Remove all “At War” markers
from this minor power’s column on the Diplomatic Status Display (this minor power’s diplomacy is now controlled by their major
power ally).
22.3
active Minor powers
Activating a minor power has the following benefits:
Military units and naval leaders of this minor power are
treated just like units and naval leaders of the major power.
They now move, fight, retreat, avoid battle, and affect nearby
Reformation/Counter Reformation attempts just like the other
units of that major power. (The only difference is that minor
power units have no impulse or cards of their own.)
Military units of the minor power have one additional char
acteristic during the Winter Phase. These units may also
return to a home key of that minor power just as if it were
an additional capital. The units of their major power ally do
not enjoy this option.
The controlling major power may use the Raise Regular Troop action to build a regular of this minor power in one of this minor power’s home spaces (assuming an unbuilt regular
exists in the counter mix).
If the minor power is Genoa, Venice, or Scotland, the control
ling major power may use the Build Naval Squadron action
to build a naval squadron of this minor power in one of this
minor power’s home ports (assuming an unbuilt squadron
exists in the counter mix).
22.4 deactivation
Changing a minor power from active to inactive is called “de-
activation”. All minor powers except Hungary-Bohemia may be
deactivated. Minor Powers can be deactivated in the following ways:
If England or France deactivates Scotland with the card
Auld
Alliance.
If the Ottoman or Papacy deactivates Venice with the card Venetian Alliance.
England, France, Hapsburgs or Papacy
may play the card
Dip
lomatic Marriage to deactivate Genoa, Scotland, or Venice.
The French, Hapsburgs, and Papacy may play the card
Andrea
Doria to deactivate Genoa from its current ally (they then
reactivate it as their own ally).
Deactivate a minor power using the following procedure:
Remove the “Allied” marker from the box that cross-refer
ences these powers on the Diplomatic Status Display.
All control markers from this minor’s former ally are removed from the minor power’s home spaces.
Units from other powers are displaced if they occupy one
of these minor power home spaces that just had a control marker removed. Move land units to the nearest friendly-
controlled fortified space and naval units to the nearest
friendly-controlled port.
Next, all land units of the minor power return to the near
est friendly-controlled, fortified home space of that minor
power. If no such fortified space is available, return them to
the nearest unfortified space. If no such space exists, the land
units are eliminated.
All naval leaders and units of the minor power return to the
nearest friendly-controlled home port of that minor power. If
no such port exists, the naval units are eliminated and naval
leaders are put on the turn track.
22.5 defeat of Hungary-bohemia
The Ottoman power is given credit for winning a war against
Hungary-Bohemia at the end of the assault or field battle in which
one of these two sets of conditions apply:
Hungary-Bohemia has been activated as a Hapsburg ally
through
Diplomatic Marriage and the Ottomans control two
home keys of Hungary-Bohemia, OR
Hungary-Bohemia is not a Hapsburg ally, but the Ottomans
control one home key of Hungary-Bohemia and there are 4 or
fewer regulars from Hungary-Bohemia remaining on the map.
When either of these conditions applies, undertake the following
actions:
The Hapsburg player must intervene
at no CP cost; the Otto-
man and Hapsburgs are now at war (even if they were allied
just prior to this assault or battle).
Hungary/Bohemia is activated as a Hapsburg ally (if not
already allied via
Diplomatic Marriage). Hungary/Bohemia
can never be deactivated and remains allied for the rest of
the game.
All Hungarian home spaces with Ottoman land units in them
come under Ottoman control (including keys currently under siege).
Hungarian units under siege are eliminated.
The Ottoman is awarded 2 VP as a War Winner for defeating Hungary.
22.6 Independent Keys
Four keys (Metz, Milan, Florence, and Tunis) are found in inde-
pendent spaces. All four start in an independent political state in
the 1532 scenario; only two start independent in the 1517 scenario
