Here I Stand, 2nd Printing
12
© 2010 GMT Games, LLC
Negotiation Example
1: It is Turn 4 of the game. At this time, the Ottoman player has no interest in negotiating. The Hapsburg player, on the other hand, is
trying to convince the French and Papal players to each ally with him to drive the Ottoman navy from the Mediterranean. He requests a simultaneous negotiation with both of those powers. Of the remain
-
ing players, only the English want to initiate another negotiation
(with the Protestant).2: Since the two negotiations involve different sets of players, they are held simultaneously. France, the Hapsburgs, and the Papacy
confer; both the French and Papacy agree to ally with the Hapsburgs for the turn. All French and Papal naval squadrons are loaned to the Hapsburg. In return, the Hapsburg player gives the space of
Besancon to France and a random card draw to the Papacy. In the
other negotiation, the English player offers to play
Book of Common
Prayer and
Calvin’s Institutes (both in his hand) as events to spur
on the Reformation. All he asks in return is that the Protestant push
forward with the Reformation in England with all possible haste.3: The Hapsburg player announces his two alliances, the loan of naval squadrons, and the transfer of Besancon. The French and
Papal players each in turn confirm this deal as announced by the
Hapsburg. The English and Protestant do nothing during this step; they did come to a consensus on the strategic considerations they discussed, but they never made an agreement that changes the cur
-
rent game state.4: Ally markers are placed in the two relevant boxes of the Diplo-matic Status Display. Markers are placed on the loaned French and
Papal squadrons. Each loaned squadron is transferred to the nearest
Hapsburg port. Besancon becomes French; Hapsburg troops there
are moved to Antwerp. The Papacy draws a card at random from the Hapsburg hand (excluding the Hapsburg home card).
9.2
alliances
Alliances are agreements between two major powers to cooperate for one turn. Alliances must be announced to all players at the end
of the Negotiation Segment. A single power may be part of more
than one alliance in the same turn. Two or more powers each in
alliance with the same power need not be allied with each other.
The restrictions on creating an alliance and the effects of forming one are detailed below. restrictions
•
An alliance may not be created if the two powers are cur
-
rently at war.
•
The Papacy and Ottomans may never become allies.
•
The Papacy may not ally with the Hapsburgs if they granted a divorce to Henry VIII this turn.
effects
An alliance provides these benefits:
•
Spaces controlled by either power become friendly to both
powers. This means that land units may enter spaces con-
trolled by their ally during movement and retreat.
•
Naval squadrons (but not corsairs) may be loaned
to an ally for 1 turn. Such a loan must be announced
at the same time as the alliance; naval squadrons
may not be loaned later in the turn. Two players may not loan each other squadrons in the same turn; such an exchange can only occur in one direction on a given turn.
Place one of the receiving powers’ “Loaned” markers on
each squadron received. Then move the loaned squadron to
the nearest port controlled by the receiving power, counting
each sea zone traversed as 1 space along such a path. A loaned
naval squadron is treated just like any other naval unit of the
receiving power (it moves, fights, retreats, and intercepts as if
it was one of that power’s naval units). The naval squadrons
stacked in a single port do not need to be loaned as a complete group. A naval leader stacked with the on-loan squadrons may also be loaned to the allied power. Naval units may never be
loaned to the Protestant power. Naval units may not be loaned
unless there is a path of sea zones connecting their current
port with a port of the receiving power. This path may not
include a port space (such as Gibraltar).
•
If a stack of land units from two major powers is attacked,
they combine their units and army leaders into one defensive
force. Either power may retreat their units and/or leaders
from the space (with each power making a separate Avoid
Battle roll). If units from two major powers defend together,
battle and assault losses are split evenly between the powers until a power is eliminated; roll randomly to see who suffers any odd loss.
Add an “Allied” marker to the space that serves as a cross-ref-
erence between these powers on the Diplomatic Status Display.
The alliance is always terminated at the end of the turn. Alliances do not allow land units from the two powers to move, conduct sieges, assault, intercept, or avoid battle together. Furthermore,
Alliances do not create a new state of war with any third party
power (i.e. a power does not add an “At War” marker with its new
ally’s enemies). However, as described above, all allied units will
add to the defense of a space even if only one of the defending
powers is at war with the attacker.
9.3 suing for peace
The second segment of the Diplomacy Phase allows powers to sue
for peace if they find themselves in an unfavourable position in a
war
and were not able to convince the other power to make peace
during the Negotiation Segment.
This phase is skipped in the final
turn of the game (usually Turn 9, but Turn 6 in the tournament
scenario). The procedure for this Peace Segment is as follows:
peace segment procedure
1.
a
nnounce
p
eace
r
equest:
Each power, in Impulse Order
(Section 3.2), announces whether or not it would like to sue for
peace to end one of the wars it is currently fighting. A power may
not sue for peace unless it has had an army leader or home space
(fortified or unfortified) captured by the other power in the conflict.
The Hapsburgs and the Papacy may not sue for peace with the Protestant (and vice versa). When suing for peace, execute Steps 2-8 below to arrive at peace terms for this war. Then return to this
step to consider suing for peace in other conflicts.
