b.
allow the Ottoman player to draw at random and keep 1 card from his hand (it can not be played until a future impulse)
c.
award the Ottoman player 1 VP for Piracy.
The Ottoman player may not be awarded a card draw if no cards
are left to be drawn from the target power’s hand. Similarly, the Ottoman player may never earn more than 10 VP through piracy in a game. The target power must always try and award one of
these three items to the Ottoman for each hit. Picking a choice of
no benefit to the Ottoman player is not permitted if another selec-
tion is available. The targeted power is free to choose different
items on a hit-by-hit basis.
17. unIT
ConsTruCTIon
There are five actions which allow powers to construct new
units. New units must be constructed in friendly home spaces
(Exceptions: The card
Foreign Recruits allows units to be built
in a non-home friendly space; the cards
Landsknechts
and Swiss
Mercenaries
allow units to be built in a space already containing a
stack of the active power’s units). Units may never be constructed
in a space in unrest. The counters provided with the game for
each power are purposely limited to reflect the total manpower of
these powers during the period. Units may never be constructed in
excess of the counters available. Players may exchange different
denominations of counters at this time to facilitate new builds
(Example: If the player has run out of “1” counters, he could still
build in a space containing 3 units by replacing the units with a “4” counter.)
17.1 Land units
Land units may be constructed in any friendly home space that is not occupied by enemy units.regulars:
All powers may spend 2 CPs on the Raise Regular
Troop action. Add 1 regular unit to the map for each such action taken.Mercenaries:
All powers except the Ottoman may spend 1 CP
on the Buy Mercenary action. Add 1 mercenary unit to the map for each such action taken.Cavalry:
The Ottoman power (only) may spend 1 CP on the
Raise Cavalry action. Add 1 cavalry unit to the map for each such action taken.
17.2 naval units
Naval units may be constructed in any friendly home port that
is not occupied by enemy units.
Naval units lost by any method
cannot reenter play on the turn in which they were eliminated.

When a naval unit is lost, place it on the Turn Track in the box
provided for the next game turn. At the start of that turn, return
these eliminated naval units to the pool of units available to be
constructed by that power.
If an event calls for naval units to be
added to the map, and the only units available are on the Turn Track, these units are forfeited.
squadrons:
All powers except the Protestant may spend 2 CPs
on the Build Naval Squadron action. Add 1 naval squadron to the map for each such action taken.
Corsairs:
If the
Barbary Pirates Mandatory Event has occurred,
the Ottoman power (only) may spend 1 CP on the Build Corsair
action. Add 1 corsair to the map for each such action taken. Note
that Corsairs may be built in either an Ottoman home port, Algiers,
or a port that has been targeted by the event
Pirate Haven.
Corsairs
are the only type of unit the Ottoman power can build at Algiers
or at a port targeted by Pirate Haven.
18.
THe reforMa
TIon
The religious struggle started by Luther’s 95 Theses in 1517 takes
place during the game at the same time as the military campaigning
covered in the earlier rule sections. This section presents all the
rules governing the religious conflict. Although the Papacy and
the Protestant power are the key figures in the religious arena, the
English and Hapsburg powers both have a vested interest in the outcome. The religious actions that trigger a change in religious status are presented first below. These are followed by detailed
instructions on resolving the Reformation attempts, Counter
Reformation attempts, and Theological Debates that result from
these actions.
18.1 religious
actions
The following eight sections describe the actions that affect the
religious status of Europe. The first two items (Luther’s 95 Theses
and the Diet of Worms) occur automatically at the start of Turn 1
to represent Luther’s initial attack on the institutions of Catholi-
cism. The remaining six religious actions are initiated through the
expenditure of CP during the action cycle.
Luther’s 95 Theses
The first phase of Turn 1 is always the play of the Mandatory Event
card
Luther’s 95 Theses
by the Protestant player. This card always
starts the game in the possession of the Protestant player (and note
that cards are not dealt until
after the Luther’s 95 Theses Phase).
This event has the following effects:
Luther is added to the Wittenberg space (Section 8.2)
Wittenberg comes under Protestant religious influence (and
the 2 Protestant regulars on Wittenberg in the Electorate
display are added to the space, see 21.6)
The Protestant power makes 5 Reformation attempts target-
ing the German language zone. These attempts are resolved
as described in Section 18.3. The Protestant rolls one extra
die in each attempt.
This Mandatory Event card is then removed from the deck.
Lu-
ther’s 95 Theses is the only Mandatory Event that does not grant
the player 2 CPs after the event is resolved.
diet of
orms
The fourth phase of Turn 1 is always the Diet of Worms phase.
In 1521, the newly-appointed Holy Roman Emperor Charles V
reviewed Luther’s teachings in front of this German legislature.
In the game, the Diet is played out using the following procedure.
diet of
orms procedure
select Commitment Card: The Protestant, Hapsburgs, and
Papacy all secretly select one card from their hand to represent
their level of commitment to these proceedings. Each of these
powers must play a card. The card may not be a Mandatory Event.
