founding a Jesuit university
After the
Society of Jesus Mandatory Event has been played, the
Papal power may spend 3 CPs on the Found Jesuit University ac-tion. The Papal power adds a Jesuit university marker to a Catholic
space (that does not yet have such a university). The cost of add-
ing a Jesuit university is reduced to 2 CPs if the debater Loyola
is committed during this action (see 18.2 below).
18.2 religious Modifiers
The chance of success of a Reformation or Counter Reformation
attempt on a space is based on the board position in and adjacent
to the target space. The religious affiliation of adjacent spaces is
the most important variable, but the presence of reformers, Je-
suit universities, and some land units also affects those religious
conflicts. Each debater present in the game has a unique special bonus; many of these bonuses also serve as modifiers to religious activities.
reformers
The four Protestant reformers are placed on the map as described
in Section 8.2. Each of these reformers provides a strong positive modifier for the Protestant in Reformation and Counter Reforma-tion attempts nearby (2 extra dice in the same space as the reformer,
1 extra die in all adjacent spaces).
Jesuit university
Two Jesuit Universities are placed on the map when the
Society of
Jesus
Mandatory Event is played. After that event has been played,
the Papacy may then start adding additional Jesuit universities.
Each of these universities provides a strong positive modifier for
the Papacy in Reformation and Counter Reformation attempts
nearby (2 extra dice in the same space as the university, 1 extra die in all adjacent spaces).
Land units
Land units that have Protestant and Catholic leanings have the same effect as reformers/Jesuit universities on nearby Reformation
and Counter Reformation attempts. The sections below describe
which armies fall into each religious camp (note that a few units
are unaligned and have no effect on the religious struggle). Each
stack of land units only modifies a religious attempt once; there is no cumulative effect for having additional land units (or army leaders) in a space.protestant land units are:
Protestant regulars and mercenaries.
English regulars and mercenaries if either Edward VI or Elizabeth I rules England.
Catholic land units are:
Papal regulars and mercenaries.
Hapsburg regulars and mercenaries.
French regulars and mercenaries.
English regulars and mercenaries if Mary I rules England.
Regulars of all four minor powers (Genoa, Hungary-Bohemia, Scotland and Venice).
Exception: While Scotland is allied
with England, Scottish units are treated the same as English ones.
Independent regulars including the Knights of St. John.
unaligned land units are:
Ottoman regulars and cavalry.
English regulars and mercenaries if Henry VIII rules England.
Unaligned land units are ignored in religious conflicts.
debater bonuses
The front (uncommitted) side of each debater contains text de-scribing the unique special bonus that this debater provides. If
uncommitted, a debater may use his bonus to increase the chance of
success of Reformation attempts, Counter Reformation attempts,
Theological Debates, and the Council of Trent. These bonuses
also can be used to make actions more cost effective. When a debater bonus is used, that debater counter is flipped to the gray, committed side. Debaters also become committed when events
requiring their presence are played and when they are involved in
theological debates. Debaters are flipped back to the uncommitted
side during the Winter Phase. The following restrictions apply to
these debater bonuses:
restrictions:
Debaters that were committed earlier in the turn may never
use their bonus.
Debater bonuses last for that one Event card play or action
only. A bonus may not be applied repeatedly to multiple ac-
tions in the same impulse.
(Example: With Loyola’s bonus,
only one Found Jesuit University action can be discounted
to 2 CP. Building two universities in a single impulse would thus cost 5 CP: one at 2 CP and one at the full price of 3 CP).
Each power (Protestant and Papacy) may only use one de-
bater’s bonus in a given impulse
that applies during
Reforma
tion or Counter Reformation attempts or biblical translations. Debaters whose bonuses apply during theological debates
always apply their bonus
if they enter a debate uncommitted
(i.e., it it not optional). Flipping a debater to his committed
side to fulfill the requirement for playing an Event card does
not count as using a debater bonus in an impulse. (Example:
The Protestant plays the event
Katherina Bora which flips
Luther to the committed side. The Protestant may commit
another debater to get bonus dice on the Reformation attempts generated by this event.)
Debater bonuses may be used during other power’s impulses.
Thus, a power might play an event on behalf of the Protestant or Papal player, or the English power may publish a treatise
in the English language zone. The Protestant and Papacy may
use debater bonuses to improve the effectiveness of such an
activity. The decision to allocate debater bonuses in these
situations is always decided by the Protestant or Papal play-
ers (even in the case of a Publish Treatise action undertaken
by the English power).
A debater who provides “Bonus CP” for translation in a lan-
guage zone may only use their bonus if the Protestant spent
one or more CP on translating in that zone this impulse.
Debaters who provide extra Reformation or Counter Ref
ormation attempts during a publish treatise or burn books action (e.g. Carlstadt, Cajetan, Caraffa, and Calvin) must be committed before any of the attempts for that action are
made. (However debaters who provide
a bonus
die roll for
such an action may be committed in the middle of the string
