Here I Stand, 2nd Printing
16
© 2010 GMT Games, LLC
12. ConTroL
& unresT
Political control of spaces can change based on actions (i.e. Control unfortified space, or a successful assault), negotiation, suing for
peace, or Event card play. A line of communication (LOC) from
a fortified home space is required to initiate actions that change
space control; rules for LOC are therefore included in this section.
Spaces can also enter unrest through Event card play. If unrest is present in a space, most of the benefits of controlling that space are lost. Unrest is removed through the same action that is used
to gain control of an unfortified space.
12.1 Line of Communication
A power has an LOC to a space if it can trace a path of spaces and
sea zones to that space from a friendly-controlled, fortified space that is a home space for that power or one of its allies
(this even
includes home spaces of minor powers allied to your major power allies)
.
All spaces on the path (except the space where the
path ends) must be:
•
friendly-controlled,
•
free of enemy units
units
(including naval units and lead
-
ers),
and
•
free of unrest.
An LOC may not be traced through an electorate until the Schmal
-
kaldic League Mandatory Event has been played. One or more adjacent sea zones may be part of the LOC if they each contain
a friendly naval unit. The path must connect to these sea zones
through a friendly-controlled port (except the space where the path
ends, which can be a non-friendly port). An LOC is required for
the Assault and Control Unfortified Space actions.
12.2 unfortified space
A power may spend 1 CP on the Control Unfortified Space action
to gain political control of a space if the following requirements
are all met:requirements:
•
The space is independent or controlled by an enemy power.
•
The space is unfortified.
•
The active power has an LOC to the space.
•
Either (a) land units controlled by the active power occupy the space, or (b) land units controlled by the active power are
adjacent to the space and enemy land units are not adjacent.
[For the purposes of this requirement, two spaces connected
by a pass are not considered adjacent.]
•
The space is not occupied by land units from another power (unless those units are allies of the active power).
NOTE: In case (b) above, the land units controlled by the active power adjacent to the space do not have to have an LOC them-
selves; the LOC requirement is only to the space being converted.
Units conducting a siege and under siege must all still be consid-
ered when evaluating case (b). Place a new control marker on the space to indicate the new owner (unless it is reverting to its original owner and no marker is required). Make sure to place the new marker on the proper side so the religious influence is unchanged. If this space is a port that
contains naval units, those naval units must immediately retreat
to a sea zone adjacent to that port following the instructions found
in Step 9 of the Naval Combat Procedure.
12.3 fortified space
Political control of fortified spaces only changes based on Negotia
-
tion (Section 9.1), Suing for Peace (Section 9.3), Siege (Section
15), and Event card play. See the appropriate section for further
details.
Impulse Example
It is Turn 1 of the game. The Protestant player was dealt four cards in addition to his Home card,
Here I Stand. Earlier in this turn, he
played a card at the
Diet of Worms and has taken two impulses
(using his Home card and one other). He currently has the cards
Katherina Bora and
Threat to Power in his hand. Luther is the
only German debater that is uncommitted. The following examples
show some of the many possible activities he may undertake in this
impulse (however it is not an exhaustive list):1: He may play either card for 3 CPs (since both cards contain a 3 in the upper-left corner). He can use these 3 CPs to call a Theological Debate (in Germany, since that is the only language zone that contains Protestant debaters). The card is placed in the
discard pile.2: Play either card for 3 CPs and use it to Publish a Treatise (2 CPs) and advance the marker for translating the New Testament in
German one space (1 CP). The card is placed in the discard pile.3: Play either card for 3 CPs and use all of these CP to advance the marker for translating the New Testament in German by three
spaces. The card is placed in the discard pile.4: Play either card for 3 CPs and use them to advance the mark-ers for translating the New Testament by one space in all three language zones: German, French and English. The card is placed in the discard pile.5: Play
Katherina Bora
as an event to take 4 Reformation attempts
in any combination of language zones. The card is then removed from the game.6: Play
Threat to Power
as an event to remove an army leader. The
card is placed in the discard pile.
7: Pass. The Protestant player is eligible to pass because he does not have a Mandatory Event or Home card in his hand and the
number of cards in his hand is equal to his Administrative Rating. NOTE: With options 2, 3, and 4 above, the Protestant player may choose to commit Luther and utilize his debate bonus, in
order to advance the New Testament translation in German by 1
