NOTE: A single unit is considered to be a “stack” for the purpose of this procedure.3.
determine
bonus
dice: The Papal player then adds 1 or 2
bonus dice to the base dice if an applicable debater bonus applies to this Counter Reformation attempt.4.
roll
papal
dice: The Papal power rolls this many dice. He
subtracts 1 from each die roll if the event
Augsburg Confession
was played this turn. The Papal player remembers the highest single roll achieved; unlike other combats, he does not count the number of hits.5.
automatic
success: If the highest modified roll achieved is a
6, this is a space within the target language zone, and Paul III or Julius III is the current ruler of the Papacy, this Counter Reforma-
tion attempt has succeeded without a Protestant challenge. Flip the target space to Catholic religious influence and skip the rest of the steps in this procedure. Otherwise, the Protestant may attempt
to stop this attempt. 6.
adds
up
protestant
dice: The Protestant power adds up how
many dice to roll:
1 die for each adjacent space under Protestant religious influence
1 die for each adjacent reformer
1 die for each adjacent stack of Protestant land units
2 dice if reformer in space
2 dice if stack of Protestant land units in space
The Protestant always rolls at least 1 die, even if none of the
items above applies to the target space. Adjacent spaces, adjacent
reformers, or adjacent stacks of units that are either (a) across a
pass or (b) in a space that is in unrest do not provide extra dice.7.
roll
protestant
dice:
The Protestant power rolls this many
dice and remembers the highest single roll achieved.
8.
determine
result: If the highest single Papal modified die roll
exceeds the highest single Protestant die roll, the space is flipped to the Catholic side. If the highest Papal roll is lower, the attempt
fails. The Papacy wins all ties if this is a space within the target language zone and Paul III or Julius III is the Papal ruler; otherwise the Protestant wins all ties.9.
ward C
:
Award 1 CP toward St. Peter’s construction if
Tetzel’s debater bonus was used in this attempt.
18.5 Theological debates
Calling a Theological Debate is less predictable than using Ref-ormation (or Counter Reformation) attempts, but it does offer the
following potential benefits:
Victory Points (VP) can be earned for burning or disgracing
enemy debaters, and
Spaces may be converted to your denomination even if you
don’t have many positive religious modifiers nearby.
Theological debate procedure
specify Language Zone: The attacker specifies the language
zone for the debate: German, French or English.2. Choosing the
attacker: The power initiating the debate ran-
domly picks an uncommitted debater to serve as the attacker in this debate. The Protestant must select from the pool of uncommitted
debaters for that language zone. The Papacy always selects from its
full pool of uncommitted debaters, regardless of the language zone
where the debate is being held. This debater is placed on the “Cur
rent Debater” box for this power on the Religious Struggle Card.3. Choosing the
defender: The power initiating the debate has
two options when choosing who to target with a theological at-tack. They may either:
choose a random enemy debater from the pool of
committed
enemy debaters (of the proper language zone if the target is
the Protestant), OR
choose a random enemy debater from the pool of
uncommit-
ted enemy debaters (again of the proper language zone if the
target is the Protestant).
The defender chosen is placed on the “Current Debater” box for
this power.Exception to Steps 2 and 3: If this debate was called with the Leipzig Debate Home card, the Papal player can either select his
own attacker or specify that one Protestant debater is not available
to defend during any round of this debate. Likewise, the Protestant
player may play
Here I Stand at this time to substitute Luther for
another debater (attacking or defending), as long as this debate
is occurring in Germany.
Here I Stand may be used to substitute
Luther even if the Papacy already specified that Luther was not available with Leipzig Debate and even if Luther is committed.4.
debate Initiator
rolls
dice: The power initiating the debate
rolls a number of dice equal to the value of the debater plus 3. Each roll of a “5” or a “6” is considered to be a hit.Exceptions:
The number of dice rolled by a Papal debater initiating a debate is reduced by 1 if the event
Augsburg Confession was
played this turn.
The debate value of a Papal debater in the English language
zone is doubled in this step if Mary I rules England.
If the debater Eck or Gardiner was chosen in Step 2, their
debater bonuses allows one additional attack die in a debate.
A Papal debater rolls two additional attack dice if they have
chosen to initiate a debate from the event
Papal Inquisition.
5.
debate
defender
rolls
dice:
The number of dice rolled by
the defending power varies based on whether or not the defender
was already committed prior to the debate:
If committed: Debate value of debater plus 1 die
If uncommitted: Debate value of debater plus 2 dice.
Each roll of a “5” or a “6” is considered to be a hit.6.
f
lip
ebaters:
Flip these two debaters to their committed side.
Also flip a debater that Luther replaced to his committed side.
