Wars of the Reformation 1517–1555
25
© 2010 GMT Games, LLC
2. Multi-zone Transport: The active power then continues to move the formation to an adjacent sea zone or port at the cost of
1 CP for each such move. Moves from one sea zone to another
are permitted as long as the power has a naval unit in each sea
zone and enough CP to get the formation back to a port before
the impulse is over. Formations may never end an impulse at sea. You must end a naval transport with one formation before starting another one later in the impulse.3.
end at
port:
Formations end their naval transport by moving
to a port adjacent to the last sea zone they entered. That port must conform to the following restrictions:
•
The port may not contain any enemy naval units.
•
It must be a space into which the power could move using
land movement (i.e. it can not be a port of a power that the
active power is neither allied with nor at war with).
Treat this movement into the final space as if it were a Move
action. Enemy units may intercept, avoid battle, withdraw into
fortifications or stay and force a field battle.4.
naval Transport and
field
battles:
If the active power loses
a field battle in the port space at the end of a naval transport, all transported units are eliminated and any army leaders present are
captured.
16.4 piracy
If the Ottoman power has corsairs in a sea zone, he
may spend 2 CPs on the Initiate Piracy in Sea Zone
action and target any power that controls a port space
adjacent to that sea zone. The target and any powers
at war with the Ottoman roll to see if they can eliminate some of
the corsairs. If corsairs remain, they roll for piracy hits, which may result in Ottoman VP, card draws from the targeted power, or removal of naval units. VP earned through Piracy are marked
on the Ottoman power card. When earned, these VP increase
the Ottoman VP total, but they do not affect the VP total of the
targeted power.
piracy procedure
1.
declare
piracy:
An active Ottoman power declares that the
corsairs in a sea zone are going to initiate piracy. A
major power
that controls one or more port spaces connected to that sea zone
must be specified as the target for the piracy. The Ottoman does
not need to be At War with that power. The Ottoman may only
initiate piracy in a given sea zone once per turn; place a “Piracy” marker in this sea zone as a reminder.2. Targeted
p
layer
a
dds
u
p
d
ice:
The targeted power adds up the
number of dice they will roll against the Ottoman. They receive:
•
2 dice for each naval squadron of the targeted power in the sea zone where piracy is occurring
•
1 die for each naval squadron of the targeted power or another
power
(major or minor) that is at war with the Ottoman in
a port or sea zone adjacent to the sea zone where piracy is
occurring
•
1 die for each fortress controlled by either the targeted power,
another power
(major or minor) at war with the Ottoman, or
the Knights of St. John. This fortress must be adjacent to the
zone where piracy is occurring and may not be in unrest or
under siege.
(NOTE: This die is for fortresses, not fortified
spaces, so keys do not give you these extra dice.)
3.
roll
dice
against
pirates:
If the targeted power receives 1 or
more dice, he makes these rolls. Each roll of a “5” or a “6” is con-
sidered to be a hit. The Ottoman eliminates one corsair for each hit.4.
o
ttoman
a
dds
u
p
p
iracy
d
ice:
If one or more corsairs remain
in the sea zone after Step 3, the Ottoman will roll for piracy. The Ottoman has the following base number of dice:
•
1 die: if there is only 1 corsair in the sea zone or only 1 port
of the targeted power connected to the zone
•
2 dice: otherwise
The Ottoman then adds the Piracy rating of any naval leader
present in the zone (1 bonus die for Barbarossa; 2 bonus dice for
Dragut).5.
roll
piracy
dice: The Ottoman rolls this number of dice. Each
roll of a “5” or a “6” is considered to be a hit. For each hit scored, the targeted power must choose to do one of the following:
a.
eliminate a naval squadron in or adjacent to the targeted sea
zone
Piracy Example
It is the Ottoman impulse. Barbarossa, 2 corsairs, and 1 naval squadron have moved out into the Ionian Sea during an earlier
action. The Hapsburgs are at war with the Ottomans; the Papacy is not. The Ottoman player spends 2 CP for an Initiate Piracy action in this sea zone, targeting the Hapsburg power. The
Hapsburg player gets to roll 2 dice against the pirates: 1 for the
Knights of St. John in Malta and 1 for the squadron in Messina.
The Papal fort at Corfu does not assist since the Papacy is not at war with the Ottoman. The Hapsburgs score 1 hit, eliminating 1 of the corsairs. Having only 1 corsair left, the Ottoman receives
1 base die (plus 1 die for Barbarossa’s Piracy rating). Both Ot-
toman rolls are hits. The Hapsburg player elects to eliminate its naval squadron at Messina and give the Ottoman player 1 piracy VP. The Hapsburg wants to avoid giving the Ottoman a
card draw (which might lead to additional piracy attempts!).
