19.5 replacements
Each power now adds 1 regular to its capital if it is under friendly control
and not in unrest.
The Hapsburgs check both capitals and
can receive a regular at each capital at this time if that space is
both controlled and not in unrest. The Protestant never receives
units at this time.
19.6 piracy Markers
Remove all piracy markers from the map at this time.
19.7 debaters
Flip all debaters to their white, uncommitted side.
19.8 Mandatory events
The following events must occur by a specified “due date”. If it is
the Winter Phase of the indicated turn and that event has not yet
been triggered, resolve the event at this time. The card is extracted
from the deck and removed from play as if it had been played by
one of the powers. The 2 CP normally granted to the power playing
such a card during the Action Phase are ignored. Event
Required by Winter Phase of:
Clement VII
Turn 2
Barbary Pirates
Turn 3
Schmalkaldic League
Turn 4
Paul III
Turn 4
Society of Jesus
Turn 6
20. THe new
worLd
There are three actions which allow the English, French and Haps
burg powers to explore the recently discovered lands of America. These powers may build a colony as an investment to receive future
economic benefits (i.e. extra cards). They may launch a voyage
of exploration in hope of making a discovery that awards them
victory points. Finally, they can send an expedition to conquer a native civilization, which yields both of the benefits listed above. New World voyages are initiated by CP spent during the Action
Phase and resolved at the end of each turn. Economic benefits
are gained at the start of each turn during the Card Draw Phase.
20.1 Colonies
These three powers may spend CP on the Colonize
action. The cost of the action is 2 CPs for the Haps-
burgs, or 3 CPs for either England or France. Add one
of this power’s colony markers to the Crossing Atlantic box of the
New World display. (Colonies markers can be identified by the
colored border that matches the color of the power.) The presence
of the colony in this box is to remind the players that this action
may only be taken once per turn by each power; play of the event
Potosi Silver Mines as an event does not count against this limit.
The English and French are limited to two colonies at a time; the
Hapsburgs may have three. Colonies are moved from the Cross-
ing Atlantic box to one of that power’s colored boxes to the left
of the New World Riches Table during the New World Phase at the end of the turn. Colonies remain in place there until the Card Draw phase of each turn when their status is checked with a roll
of the New World Riches Table.
Winter Returning Home Example
It has been a very active campaign in Italy this turn, with
the Papacy, France, and Hapsburgs all at war with each
other and fighting over control of Milan. The situation at the
end of the turn is shown. Genoa is a French ally; Venice is a
Hapsburg ally.Hapsburgs: Charles and the 4 Hapsburg regulars in Turin occupy an unfortified space and must move to the nearest
fortified space (or to a capital). They have a path available
over the Alps to Besancon. Unfortunately there is no path of
Hapsburg controlled spaces all the way to one of their capitals.
They choose to return Besancon at full strength, rather than return to a capital; a return to a capital would force them to undergo attrition and lose 2 regulars.France: Montmorency and the 5 French regulars in Milan occupy a (very important) fortified space. Montmorency and
4 regulars may spend the winter in Milan. The fifth regular
must return to the capital. The French have a path of controlled
spaces all the way back to Paris (tracing over the Gulf of Lyon
from Genoa to Marseille); this fifth unit is needed back in
Paris and returns over the path shown above. The 2 Genoese
regulars in Genoa remain there, though either or both of them
could have returned to Paris if desired.Papacy: The 5 Papal regulars in Trent occupy an unfortified space and must move to Rome or the nearest fortified space. In
either case, they will move through an enemy space and lose
three units to attrition. Ravenna and Florence are both 2 spaces
away; the Papacy may choose to return the 2 surviving units
to any combination of those 3 spaces. The Papacy chooses to return 2 of those regulars to Rome and to leave its regular in Ravenna (instead of having it also return to Rome).
