Control Terminology
f
riendly:
The term “friendly” refers to any game element (space,
unit, stack, formation, debater) that is controlled by the active power or an ally of that power.enemy:
The term “enemy” refers to any game element that is
controlled by a power that is currently in a state of war with the active power. In addition, Papal and Protestant debaters are always
considered to be enemies of each other.Independent:
The term “independent” refers to any game element
that is not controlled by a major or minor power. Independent game elements are never considered to be either friendly or enemy items
for the purposes of any rules of play.
EXAMPLES: Independent units can not intercept moving forces since only enemy formations may attempt intercepts. Adjacent
independent units do not prohibit unoccupied, unfortified spaces from being controlled, an action that is restricted by the presence of adjacent enemy units.
2.3 religious Influence
The dominant Christian denomination (Catholic or Protestant) in many spaces changes during the game as the Reformation sweeps
across Europe. Only Ottoman home spaces (which are considered
to be either Muslim or Eastern Orthodox) are immune to such a
change of religious influence. Catholic
s
pace:
All spaces on the map (other than Ottoman home
spaces) start the game under Catholic religious influence. Catholic spaces are shown by either the absence of a control marker over
a solid-covered space or by a control marker on its solid side.p
rotestant
s
pace:
Protestant spaces represent cities where the new
reformed beliefs are dominant. Spaces under Protestant influence are shown by the absence of a control marker on a Protestant home
space or by a control marker with a colored border and white center
(the reverse of its solid colored side).
2.4 Control Markers
Control markers are used to denote a space’s political control
and religious influence. The flag and border color of the marker
indicates the political control of the space. The interior color of the
marker indicates the religious influence. One side of the control
marker is a solid color that represents Catholic religious influence
while the flip side of the control marker has a colored border with
a white interior that represents Protestant religious influence. There
are two shapes for control markers: a square marker for keys and
a hexagonal marker for all other spaces.
square Markers
Square control markers are used to show the status
of keys. These markers are transferred between the
power cards (Section 4) and the map when a key is
captured or lost. Note these two rules:
Every key on the map must contain a square control marker.
Exceptions:
independent keys not currently under major
power control, keys of minor powers when they are neither
allied to a major power or captured, and keys captured by the
Protestant power (which has no square markers).
2.
Every square control marker must be either on the map or on
the appropriate power card.
Following these two rules ensures that the power cards are always
kept up to date with the proper information about card draws and victory points.
Hexagonal Markers
Hexagonal markers are used to show status of electorates, fortresses, unfortified spaces, and keys
captured by the Protestant power. These markers are
kept out of play until needed to update the political
or religious status of a space. They are never placed
on power cards.
Control Marker Example
1: Hapsburg unfortified home space. Still Catholic and under Hapsburg political control.2: Hapsburg home key. Still Catholic but now under English political control. 3: English home key. Now Protestant but still under English political control.4:
Independent space. Now Protestant, but still independent
politically.
5:
Protestant unfortified home space. Now Protestant in religion,
but under Hapsburg political control.6:
Protestant home electorate. Still Catholic and under Hapsburg
political control.
7: Protestant home electorate. Now Protestant in both religion and politics.
