Highest result is a 4 (elizabeth): Mary I is added to the deck on Turn 6. Elizabeth I is added to the deck at the start of the first
turn after Mary takes the throne. She rules for the rest of the game
once she enters play.Highest result is a 5 (sickly
edward): Edward VI is added to
the deck on Turn 6. Mary I is added to the deck at the start of the first turn after Edward takes the throne. If Mary takes the throne,
check to see if Elizabeth was born. If so, add Elizabeth to the deck
at the start of the first turn after Mary takes the throne. If not, Mary
rules for the rest of the game.Highest result is a 6 (healthy
edward): Edward VI is added
to the deck on Turn 6 and rules for the rest of the game once he enters play.If a result of 5 or 6 occurs on Turn 6 or later, Edward VI may be born while Mary I’s card is in a power’s hand or in the deck. In
this one particular case, the play of the
Mary I card by any power
is equivalent to playing the
Edward VI card. Edward becomes
ruler of England immediately. If Edward is sickly, Mary’s card
is put in the discard pile and is included in the deck for the next
turn; if Edward is healthy, the Mary card is removed from play.
Mary I as ruler of england
Henry’s heirs all have Administrative Ratings and Card Bonuses
as shown on the appropriate Mandatory Event card. These rulers
also determine the religious modifiers of English land units, as
described in Section 18.2. However, there is one ruler, Mary I,
who significantly affects the play of the English power during
her reign. A devout Catholic, Mary initiated a vehement return to Catholicism during her reign. Therefore, the following procedure is in effect when Mary rules England.
english Impulses under Mary I
show Card: When the English impulse begins, the English
power specifies the card to be played but does not yet indicate
whether it will be played as an event or for CP. 2. Mandatory
events: If the card is a Mandatory Event, it is
resolved normally. If the card is not a Mandatory Event, proceed to Step 3. 3.
roll
die: The English power rolls a die. On a roll of 1-3, pro-
ceed to step 4. On a roll of 4-6, the card is played as normal. The English player goes on to declare whether or not it is using the
card as an event or CP and resolves the impulse normally. Skip
the rest of this procedure.4.
papal
actions:
The Papal power gets to execute one or more
actions based on the CP value of the card. The English impulse is over as soon as this Papal action is resolved.
1 or 2 Cp
card: Papal power initiates a Burn Books action
targeting the English language zone.
3 C
card:
Papal power initiates a Theological Debate target
ing the English language zone.
4 or higher Cp
card: Papal power initiates a Burn Books
action targeting the English language zone followed directly
by a Theological Debate in England.
Ignore this procedure entirely if all English home spaces are
Catholic at the start of the impulse; play proceeds normally in such a case. While Mary rules, the English player is also under
the following additional restriction: Response and Combat cards may only be played for their CP value in the Action Phase.
21.4 france
The French power has one special attribute: the ability to earn VP
directly through the play of its Home card. Francis I moved the
French nobility away from building castles for defensive purposes
toward the concept of a “chateau” as a grand estate and showplace
for the arts. Each time the French player plays
Patron of the Arts
as an event, the French power rolls a die. On a roll of 3-6, 1 VP is gained and the chateaux marker is moved one space to the right on the French power card. No roll is necessary if the French con-
trol Milan (and thus have a direct tie to the artistic centers of the
Renaissance in Northern Italy); the VP is earned automatically in
such a case. The French player may never earn more than 6 VP
from building chateaux in a game.
21.5 papacy
There are four unique considerations for the Papacy: the estab
lishment of the Jesuit order through the play of the
Society of
Jesus
Mandatory Event, excommunication of reformers and rulers
through the play of the
Papal Bull Home card, the
Sack of Rome
Event card, and the building program to create the new St. Peter’s
Basilica in Rome to gain VP (as described in Section 18.1).
society of Jesus
The Papacy may utilize the Found Jesuit University action once
the
Society of Jesus Mandatory Event has been played. Prior to
this event, there are no Jesuit Universities on the map and this
action may not be taken.
excommunication
The Papal Home card
Papal Bull
may be played as an event
to excommunicate a reformer or ruler. The Papacy always has
grounds for excommunication against a reformer. However, the
Pope must have justification before excommunicating a ruler. The
possible grounds are:
That ruler’s power is currently at war with the Papacy.
That ruler’s power is currently an ally of the Ottoman.
The ruler is Henry VIII and at least one English home space
is under Protestant religious influence.
Being allied with a power that is at war with the Papacy
is not by itself grounds for excommunication. The Pope may not excommunicate any of Henry VIII’s
heirs. When the
Papal Bull card is played against a valid target,
place an “Excommunicated” marker on the appropriate box at the top of the Papacy power card; this figure or ruler may not be
excommunicated again on a later turn (and the French can only
have Francis I or Henry II excommunicated, not both of them).
against a reformer
When a reformer is excommunicated, remove his debater and
reformer counters from the map for the rest of the turn. Flip the
debater to the committed side; Event cards that require this debater
to be uncommitted may not be played this turn. He reenters play
at the start of the next turn as described in Section 8.2. Note that
even if Luther is excommunicated, he can still insert himself into a theological debate through play of the Home card
Here I Stand
(after the debate he is once again placed off the map). Excom-
