1. InTroduCTIon
Here I Stand
is a game for
two
to six players based on the military,
political and religious conflicts within Europe at the outbreak of the Protestant Reformation, from 1517-1555. Each player controls
one or more major powers that dominated Europe at the time. The
major powers represented are the Ottoman Empire, the Hapsburgs,
England, France, the Papacy and the Protestant states.
2. GaMe Map
The game is played on a 22” x 34” map of Europe in the 16th
century. Cities and towns that played an important role in the his-
tory of the period are represented on the map as square, circular,
hexagonal, or eight-pointed symbols called “spaces.” A network
of lines called “connections” link these spaces. A space connected
to another by one of these lines is an “adjacent” space. Some of the spaces are also ports (a circular symbol with an anchor inside). Ports allow access to a series of areas called “sea zones” (light
yellow regions with dash blue boundaries). The political and religious status of each space is updated through
out play using control markers. Detailed information about map elements and control markers is provided in this section of the rulebook.[This mapsheet also contains the following charts referenced within these rules: New World Riches Table, New World display,
Victory Track, Electorate Display, Diplomatic Status Display,
Henry’s Wives Pregnancy Chart and the Turn Track.]
2.1 space
All spaces in the game are either fortified or unfortified.fortified
space: A fortified space represents a walled city (or
town). A power must successfully besiege a fortified space to gain political control of that city. Up to four friendly land units
may remain within a fortified space to defend that city against an
enemy siege. Fortified spaces also serve as winter quarters. There
are three different types of fortified spaces:•
Key:
A key is a fortified space represented by a square. Keys
are the most influential and wealthy spaces; control of a key gives a power victory points and cards. Six of the keys have a
double-square border (London, Paris, Valladolid, Vienna, Rome,
and Istanbul); these keys are capitals. The Hapsburg power has
two capitals (Valladolid and Vienna) while the Protestant power
has none. The other four powers each have a single capital.
• electorate: An electorate is a fortified space represented by a
hexagon. There are six electorates on the map, all in Germany.
Each electorate represents the home city of one of the electoral
princes who had the power to elect the Holy Roman Emperor.
These spaces are the focal point of the political and religious
struggle in Germany during the game. Electorates are not keys,
but they are important spaces for the powers interested in Ger
man affairs: the Hapsburgs, the Papacy, and the Protestants.
• fortress:
A fortress is a fortified space represented by a circle
with eight points. Fortresses are walled towns with little eco-
nomic value. They never grant a power additional victory points
or cards. However, a fortress’s strong defenses force a power to
besiege the space to gain political control. Several event cards
allow a player to construct a fortress on an unfortified space during the game.
u
nfortified
s
pace:
A circle represents an unfortified space.
These spaces represent cities (or towns) that could be controlled without a siege. Forces from two powers that are at war must
fight a field battle if they ever simultaneously occupy the same unfortified space. Home
s
pace:
Spaces with a gray fill color are independent and are
not aligned with any of the powers represented in the game. All other spaces are a home space for a specific power, as indicated
in the table below. This power is referred to as the “home power” for that space. Major Power
Home Space Color
Ottoman
dark green
Hapsburgs
yellow
England
red
France
dark blue
Papacy
purple
Protestant
Brown edge with white center
Minor Power
Home Space Color
Genoa
pink
Hungary/Bohemia
light green
Scotland
light blue
Venice
orange
2.2 political Control
The political control of each space is tracked throughout the game. By default, each space is under the political control of its home
power. As political control changes, control markers are placed on
top of the space to indicate that the political control has changed
to a non-home power. These control markers are color-coded by
power and also include a flag used by that power during the 16th century.
Controlled space
A space that is controlled by a major or minor power is a controlled space. Controlled spaces for a power include:
Home spaces that have not fallen to another power.
Independent (gray) spaces seized by the power.
Home spaces of other powers seized by the power.
Home spaces of allied minor powers.
France
England
Hapsburg
Papacy
Ottoman
Inde
pend-
Protes-
tant
Note on the 2nd printing rules: A vertical line in the margin indicates an addition or modification to the 1st printing.
