Wars of the Reformation 1517–1555
37
© 2010 GMT Games, LLC
Holy roman emperor
At the start of his reign, Charles is named Holy Roman Emperor, adding most of the German-speaking lands in Europe to his
demesne. His role as protector of Germany is reflected by the
Hapsburg control markers that start the game over most Protes-
tant home spaces. Charles toured his vast empire throughout his
reign, traveling almost every year, and never spending more than a few years in a row in any area. This ability to quickly jump to another part of his realm is reflected by the Hapsburg Home card,
Holy Roman Emperor. This card allows Charles to immediately
jump to any other Hapsburg home space before spending the 5
CPs that the card provides. Note that the Response card
Gout can
be used to stop this special move (and in fact, Charles did suffer
greatly from gout for the last two decades of his life). Only the
Duke of Alva may accompany Charles on this special move; land
and naval units that start in the same space as Charles may not
use this special ability.
dual Capital Cities
The Hapsburg power is the only one in the game with 2 capitals
(Valladolid and Vienna). This benefits them by allowing them to:•
Return home to either capital in the Winter Phase, and
•
Add 1 regular in each capital in the Winter Phase.
Despite the dual capitals, the Hapsburg is still allowed to make only 1 move during the Spring Deployment Phase.
21.3 england
The special abilities granted to the English player all revolve
around use of their Home card,
Six Wives of Henry VIII. Henry’s
marital status and heirs are tracked throughout the game, as
detailed in the section below. This Home card also gives the
English the ability to declare war against Scotland, France, or the
Hapsburgs during the Action Phase. The only other card allow-ing DOW during the Action Phase is
Machiavelli: “The Prince”,
which enters the game on Turn 3 (and can be played as an event by any power).
Henry’s
w
ives & Heirs
At the start of the game, Henry VIII is married to Catherine of
Aragon, who has produced only a female heir, the future Mary I.
By Turn 2 of the game (1526), Henry is convinced that Catherine
will not produce a male heir, and his interest is captivated by the
young Anne Boleyn. Thus starts Henry’s famous progression
through five new wives in an attempt to produce a male heir to continue the Tudor dynasty.
Marital status Changes
The marker “Henry’s Marital Status” starts the game on the Catherine of Aragon space on the English
power card. Starting on Turn 2 (and each turn there-
after), the English power may play the
Six Wives of
Henry VIII card to advance the marker one space to
the right along this track. [The marker may also be moved a space if the Papacy agrees to grant a divorce between Henry and Cath-erine (Section 9.1) or if the “3” result is obtained on the Henry’s
Wives’ Pregnancy Chart.] When the marker reaches a space with
the name of one of Henry’s subsequent wives, Henry has married
again. Roll a die and consult the Henry’s Wives’ Pregnancy Chart
printed on the game map. Add +1 to the roll if the new wife is
Jane Seymour. After each result is achieved, place the marker for
the new wife on the chart over the number rolled. If a result is
ever rolled again, move up from that modified die roll one line at
a time until you come to a result that has not yet occurred. This
new result is then applied. Each result is explained in detail on
the chart. The “3” result (“Henry’s flirtatious young wife ...”)
allows the Marital Status marker to be advanced an additional space when England first decides to pass (rather than play a card) during one of their impulses later this turn. Note that neither this
bonus movement of the Marital Status marker nor playing of the
Six Wives of Henry VIII event to advance the marker may ever
be undertaken if Henry no longer rules England, if Henry is in a
space under siege, or if Henry is currently captured. The Marital
Status marker may also never be advanced if both Edward and
Elizabeth have already been born.
Marriage benefits
Each of Henry’s wives had personal characteristics, religious be-
liefs and dynastic ties that provided benefits to the English ruler.
Each marriage therefore may provide a benefit to the English
player, as specified below:Wife
Benefit
Anne Boleyn
Reformation starts in England on the turn after the marriage to Anne (3 Event cards added to
deck; Cranmer, Coverdale and Latimer enter
play).
Jane Seymour
+1 to her roll on the Pregnancy Chart.
Anne of Cleves
If English and Protestant powers are allied
when marriage occurs, each of these powers
draws a card from the deck after the Pregnancy
Chart roll.
Kathryn Howard
England draws a card from the deck after the
Pregnancy Chart roll (representing Henry’s in
-
fatuation with the young, vivacious Kathryn).
Katherine Parr
No additional bonus (though a marriage to
Katherine Parr ensures that both Edward and
Elizabeth are born).
Catherine of
aragon
In 1533, Archbishop Thomas Cranmer declared
Henry VIII’s marriage to Catherine of Aragon to be
void, paving the way for Henry’s marriage to Anne Boleyn. Since Catherine was Charles V’s aunt, this act had diplomatic repercussions felt across Europe.
Thus, whenever Henry marries Anne Boleyn (either if the Papacy
has granted a divorce or if the English player played the
Six Wives
of Henry VIII
event to advance to Anne Boleyn), give the Catherine
of Aragon marker to the Hapsburg player. The Hapsburg uses this
marker to gain a 2 CP discount on their next DOW against England.
The english succession
The following table summarizes the possible English successions
to Henry’s rule, based on the results achieved on the Pregnancy
Chart.all results are 3 or less: Mary I is added to the deck on Turn 6 and rules for the rest of the game once she enters play.
