A power may choose its Home card. Cards with higher CP values represent higher levels of commitment.2. reveal Cards: All chosen cards are simultaneously revealed.3.
roll
protestant
dice:
The Protestant player adds 4 to the CP
value of his card. This total represents the number of dice he now rolls. Each roll of a “5” or a “6” is considered to be a hit.4.
r
oll
apal and Hapsburg
ice:
The Papal player rolls a num
ber of dice equal to the CP value of his card. The Hapsburg player does the same. Each roll of a “5” or a “6” is considered to be a
hit.
These two powers combine their hits into a Catholic total.
5.
protestant Victory: If the number of Protestant hits exceeds
the number of Catholic hits, the Protestant power flips
a number
of spaces equal to the number of extra hits he rolled
to Protestant
influence. All spaces flipped must be in the German language
zone. Spaces flipped must be adjacent to another Protestant space;
spaces that were just flipped in this step can be used as the required
adjacent Protestant space.6. Catholic Victory:
If the number of Catholic hits exceeds the
number of Protestant hits, the Papacy flips
a number of spaces
equal to the number of extra hits he rolled
to Catholic influence.
All spaces flipped must be in the German language zone. Spaces flipped must be adjacent to another Catholic space; spaces that
were just flipped in this step can be used as the required adjacent
Catholic space.7.
draw: If the number of Protestant and Catholic hits is equal,
the Diet is inconclusive. No action is taken.
publishing a Treatise
The Protestant power may spend 2 CPs on the Publish Treatise action. The Protestant power makes 2 Reformation attempts
targeting a single language zone. This target language zone must
be specified before attempting the first Reformation attempt (Sec
tion 18.3). If Cranmer is on the map, the English power may also
undertake the Publish Treatise action, although the cost for the action is 3 CP. Treatises published by the English always target the English language zone.
biblical Translations
The Protestant power (only) may spend 1 or more CP on the
Translate Scripture action. In the game, completion of a transla-
tion represents the huge boost the Protestant faiths received for offering biblical texts in worshippers’ native languages. For each CP spent, advance one marker one space on either the New Testa-
ment translation track or the Full Bible translation track on the
Protestant power card. Several debaters (Luther, Melanchthon,
Tyndale, Coverdale, Olivetan) have bonuses that allow the marker
to be advanced one additional space without spending a CP if that
debater is committed during this impulse (see 18.2 below). Only
one bonus space can ever be awarded in a single impulse. The
appropriate portion of the Protestant power card is shown below
for ease of reference. There are three markers on each of these two tracks, one for each of these three language zones: German, English and French. The Protestant may not advance the Full Bible
marker in a language zone until the New Testament is complete for
that language. When a marker reaches the final space on the track,
the translation is complete. The Protestant must advance a marker
6 spaces to complete translation of the New Testament in each
language, and 10 spaces to translate the Full Bible in a language.
Immediately upon completion of a
New Testament
translation, the
Protestant power may make 6 Reformation attempts, targeting the
language zone that matches the language of translation. Immedi-
ately upon completion of a Full Bible translation, the Protestant
power may make 6 Reformation attempts, targeting the language
zone that matches the language of translation and all dice rolled
by the Protestant receive a +1 die roll modifier (i.e. possible re-
sults range from 2-7). In addition, the Protestant player earns 1 bonus VP when each Full Bible translation is completed. Once these markers reach a final box, there is no reason to continue to
pay CP to advance them; each translation may only occur once
in a given game.
Biblical translation section of the Protestant power card
Calling Theological debates
Both the Protestant and Papal powers may spend 3 CPs to Call a
Theological Debate in one of these three language zones: German,
English and French. If all Protestant debaters in a language zone
are committed, the Protestant player may not initiate debates in
that language zone. Similarly, if all Papal debaters are committed,
the Papal player may not initiate debates in any language zone. If none of the Protestant debaters for a language zone have entered the game (or all of them have been burnt at the stake, excommuni
cated, or removed from play), neither player may call a debate in
that zone. Complete rules on how to resolve a theological debate
are found in Section 18.5. This action can be triggered by a card
play by the English power if Mary I is ruler of England (Section
21.3). Certain Event cards also result in the calling of a debate.
building saint peter’s
The Papal power (only) may spend 1 or more CP on the Build
Saint Peter’s action. This action represents spending money on the
Papacy’s main building project of the time: the refurbishment of
St. Peter’s Basilica. For each CP spent, advance the “St. Peter’s
CP” marker one space to the right on the Papacy’s power card. If
the marker reaches the rightmost space, labeled “+1 CP (Add 1 VP, Set to 0)”, reset this marker to the “At Start: 0 CP” space and move the “St. Peter’s VP” marker on the line below one space to
the right. The Papacy may never earn more than 5 VP from St.
Peter’s construction in a single game.
burning books
The Papal power may spend 2 CPs on the Burn Books action.
The Papal power makes 2 Counter Reformation attempts target-
ing any single language zone. This action can also be triggered
by a card play by the English power if Mary I is ruler of England
(Section 21.3).
