7. Compare
dice
rolls:
Compare the number of hits for each
side. The possible outcomes are:
equal hits on both sides; this is the first round of the de-bate: The debate enters a second round using new debaters.
Both players select a second debater at random from among
those debaters still uncommitted in this language zone. If
no uncommitted debaters remain, the debater is chosen at
random from the pool of committed debaters in this zone.
The Protestant player may instead commit Bullinger to use
his debater bonus at this point; if so, Bullinger is inserted as the second round debater (before the random determination is made). The Protestant player also may play
Here I Stand
at this time to substitute Luther for another debater as long as
this debate is occurring in Germany. After both second round
debaters are selected, return to Step 4.
equal hits on both sides; this is the second round of the
debate: The debate is inconclusive. The action is over.
one side has more hits: The difference in the hit total is
the number of spaces that the winning side may flip to their
religious influence. All spaces flipped must be in the language
zone in which the debate was held if possible. Once all spaces
in the chosen language zone are flipped to the winning de-
nomination, additional hits are then used to flip spaces in any
other language zone. Spaces flipped to Protestant influence
must be eligible for a Reformation attempt as specified in Step
1 of the Reformation Procedure. Spaces flipped to Catholic
influence must be eligible for a Counter Reformation attempt as specified in Step 1 of the Counter Reformation Procedure. The result of the debate may be modified if Aleander or
Campeggio was the final Papal debater, as specified by their
debater bonus text,
assuming they were not committed prior
to this round of the debate.
8.
burn
protestant
debater: If the Papal player won the debate
and the difference in the hit total was
greater
than the debate
value of the Protestant debater, that debater is burnt at the stake!
Place him in the Bonus VP box of the Papacy’s power card. The
Papacy earns VP equal to his debate value. In the unlikely event
that the burnt Protestant debater was Luther, Zwingli, Calvin or
Cranmer, remove the matching reformer from the map at this time. Note that a burnt debater never affects the status of the Protestant ruler. Thus if Luther or Calvin is burnt while the current ruler of
the Protestant power, retain their ruler attributes anyway. It is as-
sumed that an equivalent replacement is found within the ranks
of the Protestant movement.9.
disgrace
papal
debater: If the Protestant player won the de-
bate and the difference in the hit total was
greater than the debate
value of the Papal debater, that debater is disgraced! Place him in the Bonus VP box of the Protestant’s power card. The Protestant
earns VP equal to his debate value.
19.
wInTer
The seventh phase of each turn is the Winter Phase, which
starts immediately after the last impulse of the Action Rounds.
During this phase, all players complete the following actions
in this order:
Remove loaned naval squadron markers
Remove the Renegade Leader if in play
Return naval units to the nearest port
Return leaders and units to fortified spaces (suffering attrition if there is no clear path to such a space)
Remove major power alliance markers
Add 1 regular to each friendly-controlled capital
Remove all piracy markers
Flip all debaters to their uncommitted (white) side, and
Resolve specific Mandatory Events if they have not occurred
by their “due date”.
All actions in the Winter Phase are undertaken by all players simultaneously.
19.1 Loaned squadron Markers
Remove all Loaned markers from naval squadrons. These fleets
will return to a port controlled by their owning power in a fol-
lowing step, not to a port controlled by the power to which they
have been on loan.
THEOLOGICAL DEBATE EXAMPLE: It is the Papal impulse
on Turn 1. The only committed debater is Carlstadt, whose
debater bonus was used in an earlier Protestant impulse to
give the Protestant three Reformation attempts for publishing
a treatise. The Papal player plays the
Leipzig Debate Home
card, using that event’s special ability to choose his debater (Eck). Eck will roll 7 dice (3 for his debate value, plus 3 as attacker, plus 1 more for his debater bonus). Since Carlstadt
was committed, he will defend with only 2 dice (1 for his debate
value, plus 1 as a committed defender). The odds look grim,
so the Protestant player uses
Here I Stand to substitute Luther
for Carlstadt (drawing a new card from the deck as specified
on that Home card). Luther (previously uncommitted), defends
with 6 dice (4 for his debate value, plus 2 as an uncommitted
defender). Both sides roll and each scores 2 hits. The debate is inconclusive; another round of debate is neces-sary. Both Eck and Luther are now committed. The attacker is now randomly determined from uncommitted Papal debaters;
Aleander is chosen. The defender is also selected at random
from the uncommitted Protestant debaters; Melanchthon is cho
sen. The Papacy rolls 5 dice (2 for Aleander’s debate value, plus
3 as attacker); the Protestant rolls 5 dice (3 for Melanchthon’s
debate value, plus 2 as an uncommitted defender). The Papacy
rolls 1 hit; the Protestant rolls 2. The difference in hits is only
1; Aleander is not disgraced. However, because of Aleander’s
debate bonus, the Protestant player flips 2 spaces to Protestant influence (instead of just 1). Aleander and Melanchthon are now committed.
