of attempts, as long as it is before any dice are rolled for the first attempt in which their bonus die is being applied).
18.3 reformation
attempts
The following actions award a player one or more Reformation
attempts (notes in parentheses give the target language zone(s)
and the number of attempts):
Luther’s 95 Theses (German zone, 5 attempts with one extra
die in each)
Publishing a treatise (zone is chosen by power taking ac-
tion. 2 attempts normally). If Carlstadt’s debater bonus is
used, make 3 attempts which all must be in German zone. If
Calvin’s debater bonus is used, make 3 attempts which all
must be in French zone.
Finishing a New Testament translation (Zone determined by
language of translation; 6 attempts)
Finishing a Bible translation (Zone determined by language
of translation; 6 attempts with +1 die roll modifier added to
each Protestant die).
A number of Event cards also award Reformation attempts (target
language zone as listed; number in parentheses is the number of
attempts):
German language zone: A Mighty Fortress (6).
french language zone:
Affair of the Placards (3),
Calvin’s
Institutes (5 with +1 die roll modifier added to each Protes-
tant die)
english language zone:
Book of Common Prayer (4),
Dis-
solution of the Monasteries (3).
all language zones:
Marburg Colloquy (sum of 2 German
debaters),
Erasmus
(4),
Katherina Bora
(5), and
Printing
Press (3 with one extra die in each Reformation Attempt for
the rest of the turn).
Many of these events are only playable if a specific debater is still
uncommitted. Upon play of an Event card with such a requirement,
regardless of which power played it, the appropriate debater is
automatically flipped to the committed side. Each Reformation attempt gives the Protestant player (or English player if this is one of the two attempts from an English Publish
Treatise action) a chance to flip a single space to Protestant reli-
gious influence. Resolve each Reformation attempt according to
the following procedure. Each space on the map can only be the
target for a Reformation attempt once per impulse. If the Protestant
(or English) power fails to convert a space, they must wait until a future impulse before trying again.
reformation
attempt procedure
pick Target
space: For each attempt, the attempting power
picks a target space. This space must be Catholic and either:
Contain a reformer,
Be adjacent to a space under Protestant religious influence (even if across a pass), or
Be a port connected to a sea zone that contains other ports
under Protestant religious influence.
The chosen space may be in any language zone, but the attempt-ing power will only win ties and receive +1 die roll modifiers (if
applicable) if the space is in the target language zone(s). The event Book of Common Prayer is further restricted to allowing only
English home spaces (which includes Calais) as targets.2.
add
up
reformer
dice: The attempting power adds up the
base number of dice to roll:
1 die for each adjacent space under Protestant religious influence
1 die for each adjacent reformer
1 die for each adjacent stack of Protestant land units
2 dice if reformer in target space
2 dice if there is a stack of Protestant land units in the target
space.
The attempting power always rolls at least 1 base die, even if
none of the items above applies to the target space (such as a space that is across a pass from all adjacent Protestant spaces). Adjacent spaces, adjacent reformers, or adjacent stacks of units
that are either (a) across a pass or (b) in a space that is in unrest
do not provide extra dice.
Note: A single unit is considered to be
a “stack” for the purpose of this procedure.3.
add
bonus
dice: The attempting power then adds bonus dice
to the base dice if any of the following conditions are met:
1 die if the Printing Press event has been played this turn
1 die if this is an attempt from the Luther’s 95 Theses event
1 die if an applicable debater bonus applies to this Reforma-tion attempt.
The total is the number of dice used in Step 4.4.
roll
dice: The attempting power rolls this many dice. He adds
a +1 die roll modifier to each roll if this attempt was generated by Calvin’s Institutes or a Full Bible translation and if this attempt is
in the target language zone(s). The attempting power remembers
the highest single modified roll achieved; unlike other combats,
he does not count the number of hits.5.
automatic
success: If the highest modified roll achieved is a 6
or higher and this is a space within the target language zone, this Reformation attempt has succeeded without a Papal challenge.
Flip the target space to Protestant religious influence and skip the
rest of the steps in this procedure.Otherwise, the Papacy may attempt to stop this attempt. 6.
dd
u
apal
ice:
The Papal power adds up how many
dice to roll:
1 die for each adjacent Catholic space
1 die for each adjacent Jesuit university
1 die for each adjacent stack of Catholic land units
2 dice if Jesuit university in space
2 dice if stack of Catholic land units in space
The Papacy always rolls at least 1 die, even if none of the items above applies to the target space. Adjacent spaces, adjacent uni-versities, or adjacent stacks of units that are either (a) across a pass or (b) in a space that is in unrest do not provide extra dice.7.
roll
papal
dice: The Papal power rolls this many dice and
remembers the highest single roll achieved.
