Wars of the Reformation 1517–1555
21
© 2010 GMT Games, LLC
15. sIeGe
Land units in a fortified space are placed under siege if they with-draw into fortifications during enemy movement (Section 13.4)
or after a field battle (Section 14.1) and enemy land units in that
space outnumber them. The land units under siege may not move,
attack, intercept, or avoid battle until the siege is broken (Section
15.3). (Naval units in a port under siege may move). Note that it
is possible for a fortified space to be under siege by two powers
at once if those powers are allies, both are at war with the power
that controls this fortified space, and each power possesses more
units in the space than the power inside the fortifications.
15.1
assault
A besieging power may spend 1 CP on the Assault/Foreign War
action in an attempt to gain control of the space, but not in the
same impulse in which the space was first put under siege by that
power. A space may only be subjected to one assault in a single
impulse (though a power may initiate multiple assaults in different
spaces in the same impulse). Assaults are conducted by a single formation of units and army leaders in the same space as the fortification. Requirements for an Assault action are as follows:
requirements:
•
The active power must have placed the space under siege dur
-
ing a previous impulse. Fortified spaces that are empty also
have to be put under siege in one impulse before they can be
assaulted in a later impulse. (Exception: The card
Roxelana
allows the Ottoman player to assault a fortified space in the
same impulse that the siege is initiated).
•
The assaulting power has an LOC to the space.
•
The power that controls the fortified space does not have a
naval squadron in an adjacent sea zone.
•
If the power that controls the fortified space has naval squadron(s) in that space, there is a greater number of squad-rons from the assaulting power in adjacent sea zone(s).
Corsairs are ignored for the purpose of these last two requirements
(naval blockade); only naval squadrons are considered.
assault procedure
1.
declare
formation: The active player declares which forma-
tion of land units and army leaders will be making the assault. All
requirements listed above must be met at this time.2.
play
response Cards: Other powers may play the Response
cards
Foul Weather and
Gout to disrupt this Assault action. The
active player has one final chance to play the Response cards Landsknechts
or
Swiss Mercenaries
to change the number of
units in the space.3.
add
up
attacker’s
dice: The active player is always consid-
ered the attacker in an assault. The attacker adds up the number of dice he will roll as follows:If against a fortified space with no defending land units:
•
1 die for each land unit in the assaulting formation (cavalry units are ignored)
•
1 die for each Battle Rating point from the highest-rated leader
in the assaulting force
If against a fortified space with 1 or more defending
land
units
(even if all units are cavalry):
•
1 die for every 2 land units in the assaulting formation (cavalry
units are ignored), round fractions up
•
1 die for each Battle Rating point from the highest-rated leader
in the assaulting force
4.
add
up
defender’s
dice:
The player controlling the space is
always considered the defender in an assault. The defender adds
up the number of dice he will roll as follows:
•
1 die for each defending land unit in the space (cavalry units
are ignored)
•
1 die for each Battle Rating point from the highest-rated leader
in the defending force
•
1 die for being the defender
5.
attacker
declares Combat Cards: The attacker declares any
Combat cards he wants to play as events to affect the assault.6.
d
efender
d
eclares Combat Cards:
The defender declares any
Combat cards he wants to play as events to affect the assault. If more than one major power is controlling defending units in this
space, each of these powers may play Combat cards.7.
roll
dice: Both players roll their dice and add up the number
of hits they have scored. Each roll of a “5” or a “6” is considered to be a hit.8.
p
lay
r
esponse Cards:
Any power may play the Response
card
Siege Artillery to give the attacker an attempt to score ad-
ditional hits.9. Take Casualties: Each side eliminates one land unit from their stack of units in the space for each hit scored by the opposing side. (Cavalry units may be taken as losses.)10.
s
uccessful
a
ssault:
If the attacker scored at least 1 hit, no
defending land units remain in the space, and at least 1 attacking unit survived the battle, the assault is successful. The attacker gains
political control of the space. All besieged army leaders are cap-tured. Place a captured leader on the power card of the adversary who defeated him. He may be regained in the Diplomacy Phase of
an upcoming turn (see Section 9). If the defender has naval units
or a naval leader in the space, place them on the next turn of the
Turn Track. In a future turn, the leader will reenter play and the
naval units may be rebuilt (8.2). 11.
u
nsuccessful
a
ssault:
If the attacker did not score at least one
hit or any besieged land units remain, the assault is unsuccessful. If the number of besieging land units still exceeds the number of
defending land units, the space remains under siege. If not, the
attacking force must retreat as described in 15.3. If all attacking
land units are eliminated, surviving attacking army leaders are placed in the nearest fortified space or their capital as described in Step 6 of the Peace Segment Procedure (Section 9.3).If, earlier in the impulse, units and leaders joined a stack of that power’s units already besieging a fortified space, those newly-
arrived units and leaders may participate in the assault and can be included in the calculation in Step 3 (provided that the full comple
-
ment of attacking forces used can fit within a single formation).
