Wars of the Reformation 1517–1555
39
© 2010 GMT Games, LLC
munication of a reformer has no effect beyond the turn in which it is declared. After the reformer is removed from the board, the
Papacy may initiate a theological debate in the same language
zone as the excommunication (i.e. English for Cranmer; French
for Calvin; German for Luther or Zwingli).
against a ruler
When a ruler is excommunicated, place a “–1 Card” marker on
their power card. This marker remains on the power card until this
power either concludes a war with the Papacy or donates a card
draw to the Papacy as described in Section 9.5
(it is not removed
if this ruler dies)
. This power receives 1 less card per turn during
the Card Draw Phase while this marker is present on their power
card. The Papacy now chooses 2 of that power’s unoccupied home
spaces that are under Catholic religious influence; add Unrest
markers to those spaces.
sack of rome
In order for the
Sack of Rome event to be played, there must be a
single stack of non-Papal troops in an Italian-speaking space that contains more mercenaries than the number of Papal regulars in Rome. That stack does not need to be from the same power that
plays the event, and neither these units nor the power playing the
event needs to be at war with the Papacy.
Rome does not even
need to be under Papal control.
The play of this card does not
add a new state of war between powers and it is not grounds for
excommunication. Once the event is played, undertake the fol-
lowing steps:
sack of rome procedure
1.
p
lace Troops in
r
ome:
The stack of troops (including all
regulars, mercenaries, and army leaders) is removed from its
current space and placed on Rome. Make a note of the space; any
surviving troops will return there.2.
resolve
field
battle: Although Rome is a fortified space, fight
a field battle between this stack and the Papal regulars in Rome.
Ignore formation limits; roll 1 die for each unit in the attacking stack.
Papal mercenaries
and allied units in Rome are ignored.
The Papacy is the defender in this battle (so it receives 1 extra die and they win ties;
roll just 1 die if there are no Papal regulars in
Rome).
Both sides may play Combat cards (and any power may
play a Response card).3.
apply Hits: Apply all hits as losses (as usual). Hits caused
against the Papal forces must be absorbed by Papal regulars first. Any hits in excess of the number of regulars may be applied to
Papal mercenaries. Hits caused by the Papal forces must be ap-
plied as evenly as possible between mercenaries and regulars of
the attacking force.4.
r
eturn Troops:
The stack of troops moved to Rome is returned
to its starting space (though probably reduced by several units!).
5.
papal Victory: If the Papacy won the battle, the procedure is
over. The
Sack of Rome card returns to the discard pile and may
reenter play on a future turn.
6.
p
apal
d
efeat:
If the Papacy lost the battle, the effects are drastic.
Reduce the accumulated CP on the St. Peter’s track of the Papal power card by 5 (but not below 0). The owner of the sacking stack
then draws 2 cards from the Papal hand (remember, Home cards are
never taken in random card draws). After reviewing those cards,
he discards one and retains the other in his hand. If the Papacy
only has 1 card available to draw, he retains that card. The
Sack
of Rome card is removed from the deck and may not reenter play.
21.6 protestant
The Protestant is the one power in the game which spends several
turns focused entirely on the religious conflict, with no military
concerns whatsoever. During this time, Germany is still under
the protectorate of the Holy Roman Empire (and thus is covered
in Hapsburg control markers). However, once the Reformation
has spread (12 spaces converted to Protestant religious influence; spaces in unrest are counted) and is attracting notice across Europe, the Protestants begin to fear that their new religion will come un-
der attack from Charles V. At this time, the Schmalkaldic defense
league is formed through the play of a Mandatory Event. From
this point on, the Protestant also has military matters to handle.
prior to the schmalkaldic League
Prior to the Mandatory Event
Schmalkaldic League,
the Protestant
player is under the following restrictions:
•
He can not build any military units.
•
He can not move any military units.
•
He may never gain mercenaries.
•
He may never gain political control of a space.
Other powers are also under these restrictions:
•
They may not declare war on the Protestant.
•
Their units may not move or retreat into an electorate.
During this time, conversion of any electorate to Protestant re-ligious influence allows the Protestant player to add Protestant regulars to that space. Remove the regulars from the Electorate
display and place them on the appropriate space on the map.
schmalkaldic League
The Mandatory Event
Schmalkaldic League
can be played as early
as Turn 2. It is automatically triggered during the Winter Phase of
Turn 4: it must occur at that time, if it hasn’t already. As described
on the card, the following effects take place when
Schmalkaldic
League is played:
•
The army leader John Frederick is added to play. Place him
with the stack of Protestant regulars closest to Wittenberg (usually Wittenberg itself).
•
The army leader Philip of Hesse is added to play. Place him with the stack of Protestant regulars that is closest to the
Kassel space (usually Mainz).
•
Convert all Protestant home spaces that are currently under
Protestant religious influence to Protestant political control.
Spaces are not converted if they contain a Fortress marker.
•
All of the restrictions listed above in the section “Prior to the Schmalkaldic League” are now lifted.
•
The Hapsburgs and Protestant are now At War. The Papacy
and Protestant are also At War. These powers may not lift these states of war for the rest of the game.
•
Any Protestant regulars and army leaders residing in an elec-
torate that is under Catholic religious influence are displaced
to the nearest electorate under Protestant religious control.
