Wars of the Reformation 1517–1555
19
© 2010 GMT Games, LLC
allies in that space avoid battle as a single group with units of their affiliated major power. A power is never required to try to avoid
battle; it is always optional.
restrictions:
•
Units may not avoid battle into an independent space or a
space controlled by another power unless that power is an
ally of the power avoiding battle.
•
Units may not avoid battle into a space in unrest or a space
containing enemy units.
•
Units may not avoid battle into a sea zone.
•
Units may not avoid battle into the space just vacated by the
enemy formation the units are trying to avoid.
•
Units and army leaders currently under siege may not avoid
battle.
•
Units of a power may not avoid battle if any units of that pow
-
er intercepted into the battle space during this Move action.
•
A leader alone in a space
may not avoid battle. (If the space
is unfortified, he is captured (13.1); if the space is fortified he must withdraw inside).
a
void battle procedure
1.
declare
attempts:
Each major power with land units in the
destination space of the Move action declares and resolves (in impulse order) an avoid battle attempt. Follow steps 2-5 for each
such power before going on to the next.2.
designate
destination
space:
This power designates an adja-
cent space into which the units avoiding battle will try to move. The space must satisfy the restrictions listed above. 3. Choose
units: The power chooses which land units and army
leaders will attempt to avoid battle. The total number of units chosen may exceed the number that can be moved as a single
formation. Any number of units may be left out of the avoid battle
attempt
(you can even leave out all land units to have an army leader
avoid battle by himself).
4.
roll
dice:
The power avoiding battle rolls two dice and adds
the best single Battle Rating of an army leader (if any) present
in
the stack of units leaving the space to the dice sum. The Ottoman
power adds 1 to its result if at least 1 cavalry unit is in the stack
avoiding battle. A non-Ottoman power subtracts 1 from the result
if it is trying to avoid a formation containing Ottoman cavalry. If the modified dice roll is 9 or more, the Avoid Battle Attempt is successful.
Exception: If every unit in the formation attempting to
Avoid Battle has already lost a field battle during this impulse, it
may Avoid Battle automatically—no dice roll is necessary.5.
place in
destination
space:
If successful, the units selected to
avoid battle are placed in the chosen adjacent space. 6.
repeat for other
formations: Return to Steps 2-5 for each
remaining power with units in the destination space of the Move action.
13.4
w
ithdrawing into fortifications
Enemy units in the destination space may withdraw inside for
-
tifications in Step 7 of the movement procedure if the following
conditions are all met:
•
the destination space is fortified,
•
the enemy power (or an ally of the enemy power) controls
the destination space,
•
there were 4 or fewer units (plus any number of army lead-
ers) present in the space after interception and avoid battle
attempts were resolved.
A power is never required to withdraw into its fortifications; it is
always optional. If they do withdraw, all units present must with-
draw together. If units from more than one power are defending the
space when the active formation enters, the power controlling the
space decides whether or not to withdraw into the fortifications. If
the units decide to withdraw inside fortifications, a field battle is avoided during this impulse. If the active formation has more units than the number of units inside the fortification, this fortification
is now under siege (Section 15). If the active formation does not
have more units, it has two choices:
1.
If there are CP remaining to be played in this impulse, the active formation may spend 1 CP (or 2 CPs if the move is over a pass) to continue movement into an adjacent space.
[However, if they are later forced to retreat from this new
space back into the fortified space, they are eliminated.]
2.
Otherwise the active formation must retreat back into the
space from which it entered the fortified space. This retreat
does not cost any CP, but the retreat must abide by all retreat
restrictions listed in Section 14.1.
14. fIeLd ba
TTLe
A field battle occurs due to a Move action into a space occupied by
an enemy formation or because of a successful interception. Each
power involved adds up how many battle dice they will roll. This
number of dice is then rolled to see how many ‘hits’ are scored.
Each hit inflicts a casualty on the opponent. The side which scores
the most hits on its opponent is the victor and retains the space. The defeated force must then retreat to an adjacent space.
field battle procedure
1.
play
response Cards: Both sides (starting with the attacker)
have one final chance to play the Response cards
Landsknechts
or
Swiss Mercenaries to change the number of units in the space.
2.
attacker
adds
up
battle
dice: The active player is always
considered the attacker in a field battle. The attacker adds up the number of dice he will roll as follows:
•
1 die for each land unit in the moving formation
•
1 die for each Battle Rating point from the highest-rated leader
in the attacking force
3.
defender
adds
up
battle
dice: The intercepting player or the
player with the stack of units in the destination space is always
considered the defender in a field battle. The defender adds up the
number of dice he will roll as follows:
•
1 die for each defending land unit in the space
•
1 die for each Battle Rating point from the highest-rated leader
in the defending force
•
1 die for being the defender.
