Wars of the Reformation 1517–1555
33
© 2010 GMT Games, LLC
19.2 renegade Leader
Remove the Renegade Leader if brought into play this turn with the event
Charles Bourbon. Land and naval units stacked with
this extra army leader are not affected.
19.3 returning Home
In the first part of the Winter Phase, naval units are returned to
ports. Immediately after naval units have been moved to ports, all
land units are moved to fortified spaces.
naval units returning Home
Naval units must be placed in the nearest port controlled by their
major power. If more than one port is the same distance away, the
owning player selects any of these equidistant ports (splitting a
stack between several ports if desired). Naval units returning home
at this time can not be intercepted, do not fight naval combat if
moving through enemy units, never suffer any attrition, and may return to a port that was under siege at the start of the phase. Naval leaders in a sea zone must return to a port with one of the units
that started this phase in the same sea zone.
Land units returning Home
Land units in either unfortified spaces or fortified spaces not con-
trolled by their major power must return to a fortified space that
is controlled by their power (with a limit of 4 per space except
capitals). Land units already in fortified spaces controlled by their
power have the option of returning to their home capital. Land units
already in their home capital are the only ones that are prohibited from moving during this phase (all other land units at least have the option to be moved at this time). Land units move according to the procedure listed below. All land units moving between the same two spaces are moved as a stack.
Check for an open path of any length of adjacent land spaces or
sea zones from the stack’s current location to its destination. To
avoid losing units to attrition, all spaces on the path (except the
space where the path begins) must be:
•
Friendly-controlled
•
Free of unrest.
Note that unlike the determination of LOC (Section 12.1), enemy
units are ignored at this time. In addition, paths may be traced
over any number of sea zones without a friendly naval unit being
present in the sea zone. Because alliances are in effect until the
end of the next step of the Winter Phase, land units may trace a path through spaces controlled by allied powers.If no such path exists, the stack takes attrition, losing half of its units (round up). The owning power chooses which units are lost to attrition.
Land unit return Home procedure
Each power performs the following steps to check the status of
all of its land units. This procedure may be performed simultane-
ously for all powers. 1. Check
s
tacking Violations:
Review all land units that are
stacked in fortified spaces controlled by their power (other than their home capital). For each such fortified space that contains
more than 4 units, the power must return the excess units to their
capital
(minor power units could also optionally return to a minor
power home key)
. Other land units in these spaces also have the
option of returning to their home capital
(or minor key for minor
power units)
if desired, even if not overstacked.
The stack takes
attrition (see above) if its path must cross or end on a space in
unrest or not under friendly control.  2.
return
units:
Now review all land units in unfortified spaces
and in fortified spaces not controlled by their major power. These units must either:
•
Return to their home capital
(or minor key for minor power
units), or

•
Return to the nearest fortified space controlled by their power
(but not if that would put more than 4 land units in that space).
The nearest space is always computed using a direct path to
the destination without regard to which power controls any
of the intervening spaces.
The player may split a stack at this time, choosing to move some
units to the nearest fortified space and returning the rest to the
home capital
(or minor power key). If more than 1 fortified space
is “nearest” (i.e. they are equidistant from the stack’s current loca
-
tion), the player may move units to each of these spaces, as long
as the limit of 4 land units is observed.
Any stack moving during
this phase takes attrition (see above) if its path must cross
or end
on a space in unrest or not under friendly control. 3.
return
army Leaders: If a space containing an army leader
is vacated during this procedure, that army leader must
either
ac-
company one of the land units
leaving the space throughout the
entire winter move or return to the power’s capital.
There are three exceptions to the rules in this procedure:
1.
PROTESTANT UNITS: Since the Protestant player has no capital, Protestant land units are always moved to the nearest
fortified space under Protestant control that can accommodate
the units while remaining within the limit of 4 or fewer units
per fortified space. Land units that start the phase in a stack
may of necessity be split up and moved to separate spaces
(Once the nearest fortified space fills to 4, compute the new
nearest space.)
2.
ENEMY-CONTROLLED CAPITAL: If a power’s capital is currently controlled by an enemy power, none of its land units may be returned to the capital. All units that would
normally have been required to return to the capital are
eliminated instead.
3.
HAPSBURG UNITS: Since the Hapsburg player has two
home capitals, his units may return to either capital in Steps 2
and 3 of the Land Unit Return Home Procedure. The Hapsburg
player may not move units into or through an electorate if the
Schmalkaldic League Mandatory Event has not been played.
19.4 Major power
alliance Markers
Remove all Allied markers between Major Powers from the Dip-
lomatic Status Display. All alliances declared for this turn during
the Diplomacy Phase are over; all alliances with minor powers
created through play of Event cards remain in effect.
