Here I Stand, 2nd Printing
10
© 2010 GMT Games, LLC

6 action phase
.............................................................

11

Powers take impulses in this order until all

powers pass consecutively: Ottoman, Hapsburgs,

England, France, Papacy, and Protestant.

A Military or Religious victory may end the game.

7 w
inter phase
............................................................

19

Leaders and units return to fortified spaces,

possibly suffering attrition

Add 1 regular to each controlled capital

Resolve specific Mandatory Events if they

have not been played

8 new
w
orld phase
.....................................................

20

Resolve Voyages of Exploration

Resolve Voyages of Conquest

9
Victory determination phase
.................................

23

Check for winner. If none, advance turn marker

and start a new turn.
8. sT
ar
TInG a Turn
Starting with this section (and continuing to Section 20), the rules are presented in Sequence of Play order. This section describes the start of a turn.
8.1 Turn 1
On the first turn of the game, play begins with the Luther’s 95 Theses Phase. The Protestant player plays the
Luther’s 95 Theses
card as described in Section 18.1 to initiate the reforms of the
Catholic Church. This phase is skipped on all subsequent turns.
8.2 Card draw phase
The second phase is the Card Draw Phase. On each turn, players
add leaders, debaters and reformers; add new cards to the deck;
and deal cards during this phase.
add Leaders

The Protestant army leader Maurice of Saxony is
placed on the map at the start of Turn 6. Maurice is the
only army leader that doesn’t either start the game on
the map or enter via a Mandatory Event. Place Maurice
in any electorate under Protestant political control. Naval leaders eliminated from play are also brought back during the Card Draw Phase. Place them in a friendly port if possible. If
no friendly port exists, they remain on the Turn Track for another
turn. Naval units eliminated in a previous turn are also returned to
each power’s pool of units available to be constructed at this time.
add reformers
The reformers Zwingli, Calvin,
and Cranmer are placed on the
map. Reformers provide bonus-
es to the Protestant player during
religious actions attempted in or adjacent to their space. The turn
that Cranmer enters varies based on the timing of Henry VIII’s divorce proceedings. Place Cranmer on the map on the first turn after Henry has married Anne Boleyn. The complete information
on the entry of reformers is shown in this table:
Figure
Space
Turn of Entry (Phase)
Luther
Wittenberg
1 (Luther’s 95 Theses Phase)
Zwingli
Zürich
2 (Card Draw Phase)
Calvin
Geneva
4 (Card Draw Phase)
Cranmer
London
Turn after Henry VIII marries
Anne Boleyn (Card Draw Phase)
Convert the religious influence of the space where a reformer
enters to Protestant religious influence. Reformers may not move
from their starting space at any time during the game. They are
completely immobile. They may temporarily be removed from the
map due to play of the card
Calvin Expelled or through Excom-
munication (Section 21.5). Reformers temporarily removed from
the map reenter play in the same space during the Card Draw Phase at the start of the next turn. The religious influence of a space does NOT change when a reformer reenters play. Reformers are never
affected by the presence of land units or by changes in the political
control and religious influence of spaces.NOTE: Zwingli is permanently removed from play by the event Zwingli Dons Armor. He never reenters play.
add debaters
Debaters represent the Protestant and Papal (Catholic) points of view during
Theological Debates. The Protestant
player starts the game with four German-
speaking debaters. During the course of the game, additional
Protestant debaters enter play during the Card Draw Phase, both for the German language zone and the English and French language zones. The Papacy starts with five debaters and adds
more during play. Papal debaters may participate in debates in
any language zone; they are not partitioned by language like
their Protestant adversaries.The number in the middle of the debater counter (on both sides) is their debate value. Text describing the debater’s special bonus appears on the front side of the counter against a white background. Each debater also has a reverse side with a gray background that
includes their picture. A debater is flipped to this reverse side
when “committed” to a particular activity for that turn.  Commit-
ment makes that debater more vulnerable to Theological Debates
called by the opposing religious power. The turn of entry is also
printed on the back of the debater’s counter. Debaters are placed
on the Religious Struggle Card in the appropriate box of avail-able debaters, with their front side up, when they enter the game. Note that the English debaters Cranmer, Coverdale and Latimer
may not be added if the reformer Cranmer is not in play. In such
a case, these three English debaters are delayed until the turn in
which Cranmer does appear.
add new Cards to deck/deal Cards
If this is Turn 3 or later, new cards may be added to the deck.
Cards are then dealt to each power as described in Section 6.2.
