the playing power receives 2 command points to spend on actions. Mandatory events may never be held from one turn to the next.
A player may not pass during his impulse in the Action Phase if a
Mandatory Event card is still in his hand. All Mandatory Events are
removed from play after they occur, except
Council of Trent and
Master of Italy. These two Mandatory Events remain in the deck from turn to turn and may each occur numerous times.
Mandatory
Events can be drawn from a power’s hand when a random draw is required; in this case the event is not triggered.
response Cards
Cards with the name of the card in blue and the word “Response” printed on them are Response cards. Response cards are playable
as an event in the Action Phase during any player’s impulse (in-
cluding your own). Play of a Response card interrupts a player’s
impulse, a battle, or an Event card play. Players should allow a
reasonable amount of time for play of a Response card by another player after each action, event, naval combat, or assault. Response cards can also be played for CPs during a player’s impulse if a
player does not wish to use the card’s special ability to interrupt
another player.
Combat Cards
Cards with the name of the card in black and the word “Combat”
printed on them are Combat cards. Combat cards are playable
as an event only during a field battle, assault, or naval combat in
which the card owner’s units are participating. The Combat card
is played just before that battle is resolved. Combat cards can also
be played for CPs during a player’s impulse if a player does not wish to use the card’s special ability to be played during combat.
event Cards
All other cards in the deck are Event cards. The name of these cards appears in black, like Combat cards. These cards are played
as events during the owning player’s impulse in the Action Phase.
They may also be played for CPs during a player’s impulse
if a player does not wish to use the card’s event. Three events
(Augsburg Confession, Printing Press, and
Wartburg) have game
effects that last until the end of the current game turn. A marker
is provided in the counter mix for each of these events. Place the
appropriate marker on the Turn Track when one of these three
cards is played as an event, to remind players that this event is in
effect. Five Event cards have special uses elsewhere as events in
another phase. These special uses are as follows:

Action
Card Name
Other Phase Used
Phase too?
Diplomatic Marriage
Diplomacy
Yes
Spring Preparations
Spring Deployment
No
Venetian Informant
Spring Deployment
No
Copernicus
Victory Determination
Yes
Michael Servetus
Victory Determination
Yes
Events with an entry of “Yes” in the “Action Phase too?” column may be played as events either in the Action Phase or this other
phase.
Spring Preparations
and
Venetian Informant
are only play
able as an event in the Spring Deployment phase (though they may
be used for CP in the Diplomacy or Action Phases).
6.2 The deck
The cards available to each power each turn consist of their Home
card(s) and a variable number of cards dealt to that power from a
single deck of shared cards. The deck is reshuffled each turn, after
any new cards for that turn have been added, and before cards are
dealt to each power.
adding Cards
The upper-right hand corner of 37 cards contains a turn number
or the word “Variable.” None of these cards are used on Turn 1.Instead, at the start of the Card Draw Phase of Turn 3 and later turns, players review each of these cards to see if they should be
added to the deck before new hands are dealt. These cards fall
into three types:
31 of these cards show a turn number, with no further condition. These cards are always added to the deck in the indicated turn.
2 of these cards (#19 ‘Edward VI’ and #21 ‘Mary I’) show a
turn number with a condition for play. These cards are added
to the deck in the indicated turn only if the condition listed is
true. If it is false, the card is set aside until the following turn.
The card is added to the deck during the Card Draw Phase of
the next turn in which the condition is satisfied. These cards
may never be added to the deck before the indicated turn,
even if the condition is satisfied.
4 of these cards read “Variable.” These cards are each added
to the deck during the Card Draw Phase of the first turn in
which the condition is satisfied.
Cards without a turn number or the world “Variable” start in the
deck at the beginning of the game (Exception: In a scenario with
the 1532 setup, cards marked with “(1517)” are not included.).
dealing Cards
Each power is dealt the number of cards indicated in the lower left
section of their power card plus one extra card if they receive a
card bonus from their ruler. These newly dealt cards are combined
with the power’s Home card(s) and any unused cards from the
previous turn to form the power’s “hand” for the upcoming turn.
Home Card
Mandatory Card
Combat Card
Response Card
Event Card
